EXO 1:1 These be the names of the sons of Israel, that entered into Egypt with Jacob; all entered with their households;
EXO 1:2 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah,
EXO 1:3 Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
EXO 1:4 Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
EXO 1:5 Therefore all the souls of them that went out of the hip of Jacob were seventy and five. Forsooth Joseph was in Egypt;
EXO 1:6 and when he was dead, and all his brethren, and all his kindred,
EXO 1:7 the sons of Israel increased, and were multiplied as burgeoning, and they were made strong greatly, and filled the land.
EXO 1:8 A new king, that knew not Joseph, rose [[up]] in the meantime on Egypt,
EXO 1:9 and said to his people, Lo! the people of the sons of Israel is much, and stronger than we;
EXO 1:10 come ye, wisely oppress we it, lest peradventure it be multiplied; and lest, if battle riseth against us, it be added to our enemies, and go out of the land, when we be overcome.
EXO 1:11 And so he made masters of works sovereigns to them, that they should torment them with charges. And they made [[the]] cities of tabernacles, either of treasures, as it is in Hebrew, to Pharaoh, Pithom, and Raamses.
EXO 1:12 And by how much they oppressed them, by so much they were multiplied, and increased the more.
EXO 1:13 And the Egyptians hated the sons of Israel, and tormented, and scorned them;
EXO 1:14 and they brought their life to bitterness, by hard works of clay and of tilestone, and by all servage, by which they were oppressed in the works of [[the]] earth.
EXO 1:15 Forsooth the king of Egypt said to the midwives of Hebrews, of which one was called Shiphrah, [[and]] the tother Puah;
EXO 1:16 and he commanded to them, When ye shall do the office of midwives to [[the]] Hebrew women, and the time of child-bearing shall come, if it is a knave child, slay ye him; if it is a woman child, keep ye it.
EXO 1:17 But the midwives dreaded God, and did not by the commandment of the king of Egypt, but kept the knave children.
EXO 1:18 To the which called to him, the king said, What is this thing that ye would do, that ye would keep the knave children?
EXO 1:19 The which answered, Hebrew women be not as the women of Egypt, for they have knowing of the craft of midwifing, and childed before that we come to them.
EXO 1:20 Therefore God did well to the midwives; and the people increased, and was comforted greatly.
EXO 1:21 And for the midwives dreaded God, God builded them houses.
EXO 1:22 Therefore Pharaoh commanded all his people, and said, Whatever thing of male kind is born to Hebrews, cast ye into the flood; whatever thing of women kind, keep ye.
EXO 2:1 After these things a man of the house of Levi went out, and took a wife of his kin into fleshly coupling,
EXO 2:2 which conceived, and childed a son. And she saw him well-faring, and hid him three months.
EXO 2:3 And when she might not cover [[him]], then she took a basket of sedge, and balmed it with tar and pitch, and put the young child within, and put him forth in a place of spires of the brink of the flood,
EXO 2:4 the while his sister stood afar, and beheld the befalling of the thing.
EXO 2:5 Lo! forsooth the daughter of Pharaoh came down to be washed in the flood, and her damsels walked by the brink of the flood. And when she had seen a basket in the place of spires, she sent one of her servantesses,
EXO 2:6 and she opened the basket brought to her, and she saw a little child weeping therein. And she had mercy on the child, and said, It is of the young children of Hebrews.
EXO 2:7 To whom the child’s sister said, Wilt thou that I go, and call to thee an Hebrew woman, that may nourish the young child?
EXO 2:8 She answered, Go thou. The damsel went, and called the child’s mother.
EXO 2:9 To whom Pharaoh’s daughter spake, and said, Take thou this child, and nourish it to me; and I shall give to thee thy meed. The woman took, and nourished the child,
EXO 2:10 and she betook him, waxen, to Pharaoh’s daughter, whom she purchased into the place of a son; and she called his name Moses, and said, For I took him from the water.
EXO 2:11 In those days, after that Moses increased, he went out to his brethren, and saw the torment of them, and a man Egyptian smiting an Hebrew man, one of his brethren.
EXO 2:12 And when he had beholden hither and thither, and had seen, that no man was present, he killed the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.
EXO 2:13 And he went out in another day, and saw twain [[or two]] Hebrew men chiding, and he said to him that did [[the]] wrong, Why smitest thou thy brother?
EXO 2:14 Which answered, Who ordained thee prince, or judge, [[or prince and doomsman] [up]] on us? Whether thou wilt slay me, as thou killedest yesterday the Egyptian? Moses dreaded, and said, How is this word made open?
EXO 2:15 And Pharaoh heard this word, and sought to slay Moses, which fled from his face, and dwelled in the land of Midian; and he sat beside a well.
EXO 2:16 Forsooth seven daughters were to the priest of Midian, that came to draw water; and when the troughs were filled, they coveted to water their father’s flocks.
EXO 2:17 Shepherds came upon them, and drove them away; and Moses rose, and defended the damsels; and he watered their sheep.
EXO 2:18 And when they had turned again to Jethro, their father, he said to them, Why came ye swifter than ye were wont?
EXO 2:19 They answered, A man of Egypt delivered us from the hand of the shepherds; furthermore and he drew water with us, and gave drink to the sheep.
EXO 2:20 And he said, Where is that man? why left ye the man? call ye him, that he eat bread.
EXO 2:21 Therefore Moses swore, that he would dwell with Jethro, and he took a wife, Zipporah, Jethro’s daughter.
EXO 2:22 And she childed a son to him, whom he called Gershom, and said, I was a comeling in an alien land. Forsooth she childed another son, whom he called Eliezer, and said, For [[the]] God of my father is mine helper, and he delivered me from the hand of Pharaoh.
EXO 2:23 Forsooth after much time the king of Egypt died, and the sons of Israel inwardly wailed for [[the]] works, and they cried [[out]], and the cry of them for their works went up to God.
EXO 2:24 And he heard the wailing of them, and he had mind of the bond of peace, which he had made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;
EXO 2:25 and he beheld the sons of Israel, and knew them, that is, showed love to them.
EXO 3:1 Forsooth Moses kept the sheep of Jethro, his wife’s father, priest of Midian; and when he had driven the flock to the inner parts of the desert, he came to Horeb, the hill of God.
EXO 3:2 Forsooth the Lord appeared to him there in a flame of fire from the middle of a bush, and Moses saw that the bush burnt, and it was not burnt up.
EXO 3:3 Therefore Moses said, I shall go and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.
EXO 3:4 Soothly the Lord saw that Moses went to see, and he called him from the midst of the bush, and said, Moses! Moses! Which answered, I am present.
EXO 3:5 And the Lord said, Nigh thou not hither, but unbind thou the shoes of thy feet, for the place in which thou standest is holy land.
EXO 3:6 And the Lord said, I am God of thy fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob. Moses hid his face, for he durst not look against God.
EXO 3:7 To whom the Lord said, I saw the affliction of my people in Egypt, and I heard the cry thereof, for the hardness of them that be sovereigns of the works. And I knew the sorrow of the people,
EXO 3:8 and I came down to deliver them from the hands of Egyptians, and lead out of that land into a good land and broad, into a land that floweth with milk and honey, to the places of Canaanites, and of Hittites, of Amorites, and of Perizzites, and of Hivites, and of Jebusites.
EXO 3:9 Therefore the cry of the sons of Israel came to me, and I saw the torment of them, by which they be oppressed of the Egyptians.
EXO 3:10 But come thou, I shall send thee to Pharaoh, that thou lead out my people, the sons of Israel, from Egypt.
EXO 3:11 And Moses said to him, Who am I, that I go to Pharaoh, and lead out the sons of Israel from Egypt?
EXO 3:12 And the Lord said to Moses, I shall be with thee, and thou shalt have this sign, that I have sent thee; when thou hast led out my people from Egypt, thou shalt offer to God on this hill.
EXO 3:13 Moses said to God, Lo! I shall go to the sons of Israel, and I shall say to them, [[The]] God of your fathers sent me to you; if they shall say to me, What is his name, what shall I say to them?
EXO 3:14 The Lord said to Moses, I am that I am. The Lord said, Thus thou shalt say to the sons of Israel, He that is, sent me to you.
EXO 3:15 And again God said to Moses, Thou shalt say these things to the sons of Israel, The Lord God of your fathers, God of Abraham, and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, sent me to you; this name is to me without end, and this is my memorial in generation and into generation.
EXO 3:16 Go thou, gather thou the elder men, that is, judges, of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, The Lord God of your fathers appeared to me, God of Abraham, and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, and he said, I visiting have visited you, and I have seen all things that befelled to you in Egypt;
EXO 3:17 and I said, that I should lead out you from the affliction of Egypt, into the land of Canaanites, and of Hittites, and of Amorites, and of Perizzites, and of Hivites, and of Jebusites, to the land flowing with milk and honey.
EXO 3:18 And they shall hear thy voice; and thou shalt enter, and the elder men of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and thou shalt say to him, The Lord God of Hebrews hath called us; we shall go the way of three days into wilderness, that we offer to our Lord God.
EXO 3:19 But I know, that the king of Egypt shall not deliver you that ye go, but by strong hand;
EXO 3:20 for I shall hold forth mine hand, and I shall smite Egypt in all my marvels which I shall do in the midst of them; after these things he shall deliver you.
EXO 3:21 And I shall give grace to this people before [[the]] Egyptians, and when ye shall go out, ye shall not go out void;
EXO 3:22 but a woman shall ask of her neighbouress, and of her that she is harboured with, silveren vessels, and golden, and clothes, and ye shall put those [[or them]] upon your sons and daughters, and ye shall make naked Egypt.
EXO 4:1 Moses answered, and said, The commons shall not believe to me, neither they shall hear my voice; but they shall say, The Lord appeared not to thee.
EXO 4:2 Therefore the Lord said to him, What is that that thou holdest in thine hand? Moses answered, A rod, that is, a shepherd’s staff.
EXO 4:3 And the Lord said, Cast it forth into the earth; and he cast it forth, and it was turned into a serpent, so that Moses fled.
EXO 4:4 And the Lord said, Hold forth thine hand, and take the tail thereof; he stretched forth his hand, and held it, and it was turned again into a rod.
EXO 4:5 And the Lord said, That they believe, that the Lord God of thy fathers appeared to thee, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob.
EXO 4:6 And the Lord said again to Moses, Put thine hand into thy bosom; and when he had put it into his bosom, he brought forth it leprous, at the likeness of snow.
EXO 4:7 The Lord said, Again draw thine hand into thy bosom; Moses again drew in his hand, and brought it forth again, and it was like to the tother flesh.
EXO 4:8 The Lord said, If they shall not believe to thee, neither shall hear the word of the former sign, either miracle, they shall believe to the word of the sign pursuing [[or that followeth]];
EXO 4:9 that if they believe not to these two signs, neither hear thy voice, take thou water of the flood, and shedded out it [[or pour it out] [up]] on the dry land, and whatever thing thou shalt draw up of the flood, it shall be turned into blood.
EXO 4:10 Moses said, Lord, I beseech, I am not eloquent, that is, a fair speaker, from yesterday and the third day ago; and since thou hast spoken to thy servant, I am of more hindered, and of slower tongue.
EXO 4:11 The Lord said to him, Who made the mouth of [[a]] man, or who made a dumb man, and deaf, seeing, and blind? whether not I?
EXO 4:12 Therefore go thou, and I shall be in thy mouth, and I shall teach thee what thou shalt speak.
EXO 4:13 And Moses said, Lord, I beseech thee, send whom thou shalt.
EXO 4:14 And the Lord was wroth against Moses, and said, I know, that Aaron, thy brother, of the lineage of Levi, is eloquent, that is, a fair speaker; lo! he shall go out into thy coming, and he shall see thee, and he shall be glad in heart.
EXO 4:15 Speak thou to him, and put thou my words in his mouth, and I shall be in thy mouth, and in his mouth; and I shall show to you what ye ought to do.
EXO 4:16 He shall speak for thee to the people, and he shall be thy mouth; forsooth thou shalt be to him in these things, that pertain to God.
EXO 4:17 Also take thou this rod in thine hand, in which thou shalt do miracles.
EXO 4:18 Moses went, and turned again to Jethro, his wife’s father, and said to him, I shall go, and turn again to my brethren into Egypt, that I see, whether they live yet. To whom Jethro said, Go thou in peace.
EXO 4:19 Therefore the Lord said to Moses in Midian, Go thou, and turn again into Egypt; for all they be dead that sought thy life.
EXO 4:20 Moses took his wife, and his sons, and set them on an ass, and he turned again into Egypt, and he bare the rod of God in his hand.
EXO 4:21 And the Lord said to him turning again into Egypt, See, that thou do all the wonders, which I have put in thine hand, before Pharaoh; I shall make hard his heart, and he shall not deliver the people;
EXO 4:22 and thou shalt say to him, The Lord saith these things, My first begotten son is Israel;
EXO 4:23 I said to thee, Deliver thou my son, that he serve me, and thou wouldest not deliver him; lo! I shall slay thy first begotten son.
EXO 4:24 And when Moses was in the way, in an inn, the Lord came to him, and would slay him.
EXO 4:25 Zipporah took anon a most sharp stone, and circumcised the rod of her son; and she touched Moses’ feet, and said, Thou art an husband of bloods to me.
EXO 4:26 And he let go him, after that she had said, Thou art an husband of bloods to me, for [[the]] circumcision.
EXO 4:27 Forsooth the Lord said to Aaron, Go thou into the coming of Moses into desert; which went against Moses into the hill of God, and kissed him.
EXO 4:28 And Moses told to Aaron all the words of the Lord, for which he had sent Moses; and he told him about the miracles, which the Lord had commanded.
EXO 4:29 And they came together, and gathered all the elder men of the sons of Israel.
EXO 4:30 And Aaron spake all the words, which the Lord had said to Moses, and he did the signs before the people;
EXO 4:31 and the people believed; and they heard, that the Lord had visited the sons of Israel, and that he had beheld the torment of them; and they worshipped lowly, or meekly, the Lord.
EXO 5:1 After these things Moses and Aaron entered, and said to Pharaoh, The Lord God of Israel saith these things, Deliver thou my people, that it make sacrifice to me in desert,.
EXO 5:2 And Pharaoh answered, Who is the Lord, that I hear his voice, and deliver Israel? I know not the Lord, and I shall not deliver Israel.
EXO 5:3 They said, [[The]] God of Hebrews called us, that we go the way of three days into wilderness, and that we make sacrifice to our Lord God, lest peradventure pestilence, or sword, befall to us.
EXO 5:4 The king of Egypt said to them, Moses and Aaron, why stir ye the people from their works? Go ye to your charges.
EXO 5:5 And Pharaoh said, The people of the land is much; ye see that the company hath increased; how much more shall it increase, if ye shall give to them rest from works.
EXO 5:6 Therefore Pharaoh commanded in that day to the masters of works, and to the rent gatherers of the people, and said,
EXO 5:7 Ye shall no more give straw to the people, to make tilestones, as ye have done before; but go they, and gather stubble;
EXO 5:8 and ye shall set on them the measure of tilestones, which they made before, neither ye shall abate anything; for they be idle, and therefore they cry, and say, Go we, and make we sacrifice to our God;
EXO 5:9 be they oppressed by works, and fulfill they those [[or them]], that they assent not to false words.
EXO 5:10 Therefore the masters of the works and the rent gatherers went out to the people, and said, Thus saith Pharaoh, I give not to you straw;
EXO 5:11 go ye, and gather ye, if ye may find anywhere; neither anything shall be decreased of your work.
EXO 5:12 And the people was scattered by all the land of Egypt to gather straw.
EXO 5:13 And the masters of the works were busy, and said, Fulfill ye your work each day, as ye were wont to do, when the straw was given to you.
EXO 5:14 And they, that were masters of the works of the sons of Israel, were beaten of the rent gatherers of Pharaoh, that said, Why fulfilled ye not the measure of tilestones, as ye did before, neither yesterday, neither today?
EXO 5:15 And the sovereigns [[or masters]] of the children of Israel came, and cried to Pharaoh, and said, Why doest thou so against thy servants?
EXO 5:16 Straw is not given to us, and tilestones be commanded in like manner. Lo! we thy servants be beaten with scourges, and it is done unjustly against thy people.
EXO 5:17 Pharaoh said, Ye give attention to idleness, and therefore ye say, Go we, and make we sacrifice to the Lord;
EXO 5:18 therefore go ye, and work; straw shall not be given to you, and ye shall yield the customable number of tile-stones.
EXO 5:19 And the sovereigns of the children of Israel saw themselves in evil, for it was said to them, Nothing shall be decreased of tilestones by all days.
EXO 5:20 And they coming out from Pharaoh, met Moses and Aaron, that stood even there against,
EXO 5:21 and they said to them, The Lord see, and deem, for ye have made our odour, or fame, stink before Pharaoh, and his servants, that is, ye have made us abominable and hateful; and ye have given to him a sword, that he should slay us.
EXO 5:22 And Moses turned again to the Lord, and said, Lord, why hast thou tormented this people? why sentest thou me?
EXO 5:23 For since I entered to Pharaoh, that I should speak in thy name, thou hast tormented thy people, and hast not delivered them.
EXO 6:1 And the Lord said to Moses, Now thou shalt see, what things I shall do to Pharaoh; for by [[a]] strong hand he shall deliver them, that is, the sons of Israel, and in [[a]] mighty hand he shall cast them out of his land.
EXO 6:2 And the Lord spake to Moses, and said, I am the Lord,
EXO 6:3 that appeared to Abraham, and to Isaac, and to Jacob, I am Almighty God; and I showed not to them my great name Adonai, that is, Tetragrammaton.
EXO 6:4 and I made [[a]] covenant with them, that I should give to them the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, in which they were comelings.
EXO 6:5 I heard the wailing of the sons of Israel, in which the Egyptians oppressed them, and I had mind of my covenant.
EXO 6:6 Therefore say thou to the sons of Israel, I am the Lord, that shall lead you out of the prison of the Egyptians; and I shall deliver you from servage; and I shall again-buy you in an arm straight out, and in great dooms;
EXO 6:7 and I shall take you to me into a people, and I shall be your God; and ye shall know, for I am your Lord God, which have led you out of the prison of Egyptians,
EXO 6:8 and have led you into the land, on which I raised [[up]] mine hand, that I should give it to Abraham, and to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I shall give to you that land to be had in possession; I [[am]] the Lord.
EXO 6:9 Therefore Moses told all things to the sons of Israel, which assented not to him for the anguish of spirit, and for the full hard work by which they were troubled.
EXO 6:10 And the Lord spake to Moses, and said,
EXO 6:11 Enter thou, and speak to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, that he deliver the children of Israel from his land.
EXO 6:12 Moses answered before the Lord, Lo! the children of Israel hear not me; and how shall Pharaoh hear, mostly since I am uncircumcised in lips?
EXO 6:13 And the Lord spake to Moses and to Aaron, and he gave behests to the sons of Israel, and to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, that they should lead out the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt.
EXO 6:14 These be the princes of the houses by their meines. The sons of Reuben, the first begotten of Israel; Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi; these be the kindreds of Reuben.
EXO 6:15 The sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul, the son of a woman of Canaan; these be the kindreds of Simeon.
EXO 6:16 And these be the names of the sons of Levi by their kindreds; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari. Forsooth the years of the life of Levi were an hundred and seven and thirty.
EXO 6:17 The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, by their kindreds.
EXO 6:18 The sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel; and the years of the life of Kohath were an hundred and three and thirty.
EXO 6:19 The sons of Merari were Mahali and Mushi. These were the kindreds of Levi by their meines.
EXO 6:20 Forsooth Amram took a wife, Jochebed, the daughter of his father’s brother, and she childed to him Aaron, and Moses, and Marie; and the years of the life of Amram were an hundred and seven and thirty.
EXO 6:21 Also the sons of Izhar were Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.
EXO 6:22 Also the sons of Uzziel were Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri.
EXO 6:23 Soothly Aaron took a wife, Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab, the sister of Naashon, and she childed to him Nadab, and Abihu, and Eleazar, and Ithamar.
EXO 6:24 Also the sons of Korah were Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph; these were the kindreds of Korah.
EXO 6:25 And soothly Eleazar, son of Aaron, took a wife of the daughters of Putiel, and she childed Phinehas to him. These be the princes of the meines of Levi by their kindreds.
EXO 6:26 This is Aaron and Moses, to which the Lord commanded, that they should lead out of the land of Egypt the sons of Israel by their companies;
EXO 6:27 these it be, that spake to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, that they lead the sons of Israel out of Egypt; this is Moses and Aaron,
EXO 6:28 in the day in which the Lord spake to Moses in the land of Egypt.
EXO 6:29 And the Lord spake to Moses, and said, I am the Lord; speak thou to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, all things which I speak to thee.
EXO 6:30 And Moses said before the Lord, Lo! I am uncircumcised in lips; how shall Pharaoh hear me?
EXO 7:1 And the Lord said to Moses, Lo! I have made thee the god of Pharaoh; and Aaron, thy brother, shall be thy prophet.
EXO 7:2 Thou shalt speak to Aaron all things which I command to thee, and he shall speak to Pharaoh, that he deliver the sons of Israel from his land.
EXO 7:3 But I shall make hard his heart, and I shall multiply my signs and marvels in the land of Egypt,
EXO 7:4 and he shall not hear you; and I shall send mine hand on Egypt, and I shall lead out mine host, and my people, the sons of Israel, from the land of Egypt by most dooms;
EXO 7:5 and [[the]] Egyptians shall know, that I am the Lord, which have held forth mine hand on Egypt, and have led out of the midst of them the sons of Israel.
EXO 7:6 And so Moses did and Aaron; as the Lord commanded, so they did.
EXO 7:7 Forsooth Moses was of fourscore years, and Aaron of fourscore years and three, when they spake to Pharaoh.
EXO 7:8 And the Lord said to Moses and to Aaron,
EXO 7:9 When Pharaoh shall say to you, Show ye signs to us, thou shalt say to Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast forth it before Pharaoh, and be it turned into a serpent.
EXO 7:10 And so Moses and Aaron entered to Pharaoh, and did as the Lord commanded; and Aaron took the rod, and cast forth it before Pharaoh and his servants, the which rod was turned into a serpent.
EXO 7:11 Forsooth Pharaoh called forth wise men, and witches, and they also did by enchantments of Egypt, and by some privy things, in like manner;
EXO 7:12 and all casted forth their rods, which were turned into dragons; but the rod of Aaron devoured their rods.
EXO 7:13 And the heart of Pharaoh was made hard, and he heard not them, as the Lord commanded.
EXO 7:14 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, The heart of Pharaoh is made grievous, he will not deliver the people;
EXO 7:15 go thou to him early; lo! he shall go out to the waters, and thou shalt stand in the coming of him on the brink of the flood; and thou shalt take in thine hand the rod, that was turned into a dragon,
EXO 7:16 and thou shalt say to him, The Lord God of Hebrews sent me to thee, and said, Deliver thou my people, that it make sacrifice to me in desert; and till to this present time thou wouldest not hear.
EXO 7:17 Therefore the Lord saith these things, In this thou shalt know, that I am the Lord; lo! I shall smite with the rod, that is in mine hand, the water of the flood, and it shall be turned into blood;
EXO 7:18 and the fishes that be in the flood shall die; and the waters shall wax rotten, and the Egyptians drinking the water of the flood shall be tormented.
EXO 7:19 Also the Lord said to Moses, Say thou to Aaron, Take thy rod, and hold forth thine hand on the waters of Egypt, and on the floods of them, and on the streams of them, and on the marshes, and on all the lakes of waters, that those [[or they]] be turned into blood; and blood be in all the land of Egypt, as well in vessels of wood, as of stone.
EXO 7:20 And Moses and Aaron did so, as the Lord commanded; and Aaron raised the rod, and smote the water of the flood before Pharaoh and his servants, which water was turned into blood;
EXO 7:21 and [[the]] fishes, that were in the flood, died; and the flood was rotten, and [[the]] Egyptians might not drink the water of the flood; and blood was in all the land of Egypt.
EXO 7:22 And the witches of [[the]] Egyptians did in like manner by their enchant-ments; and the heart of Pharaoh was made hard, and he heard not them, as the Lord commanded.
EXO 7:23 And he turned away himself, and entered into his house, neither he took it to heart, yea, in this time.
EXO 7:24 Forsooth all [[the]] Egyptians digged water about the flood, to drink; for they might not drink of [[the]] water of the flood.
EXO 7:25 And seven days were fulfilled, after that the Lord smote the flood.
EXO 8:1 Also the Lord said to Moses, Enter thou to Pharaoh, and thou shalt say to him, The Lord saith these things, Deliver thou my people, that it make sacrifice to me;
EXO 8:2 soothly if thou wilt not deliver, lo! I shall smite all thy terms, or coasts, with paddocks [[or frogs]];
EXO 8:3 and the flood shall boil out paddocks [[or frogs]], that shall go up, and enter into thine house, and into the closet of thy bed, and on thy bed, and into the houses of thy servants, and into thy people, and into thine ovens, and into the remnants of thy meats;
EXO 8:4 and the paddocks [[or frogs]] shall enter to thee, and to thy people, and to all thy servants.
EXO 8:5 And the Lord said to Moses, Say thou to Aaron, Hold forth thine hand on the floods, and on the streams, and on the marshes; and bring out paddocks on the land of Egypt.
EXO 8:6 And Aaron held forth the hand on the waters of Egypt; and paddocks went up, and covered the land of Egypt.
EXO 8:7 Forsooth and the witches did in like manner by their enchantments; and they brought forth paddocks [[or frogs]] on the land of Egypt.
EXO 8:8 Forsooth Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said to them, Pray ye the Lord, that he do away the paddocks [[or frogs]] from me, and from my people; and I shall deliver the people, that it make sacrifice to the Lord.
EXO 8:9 And Moses said to Pharaoh, Ordain thou a time to me, when I shall pray for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, that the paddocks be driven away from thee, and from thine houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; and [[they]] dwell only in the flood.
EXO 8:10 And he answered, Tomorrow. And Moses said, I shall do by thy word, that thou know, that none is as our Lord God;
EXO 8:11 and the paddocks shall go away from thee, and from thine houses, and from thy children, and from thy servants, and from thy people; and they shall dwell only in the flood.
EXO 8:12 And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh. And Moses cried to the Lord, for the promise of paddocks [[or frogs]], which he had said to Pharaoh.
EXO 8:13 And the Lord did by the word of Moses; and the paddocks [[or frogs]] were dead from [[the]] houses, and from [[the]] towns, and from [[the]] fields;
EXO 8:14 and they gathered them [[together]] into great heaps [[without number]], and the land was rotten, or corrupted with stink, [[or the earth stank]].
EXO 8:15 Soothly Pharaoh saw that rest was given, and he made grievous his heart, and he heard not them, as the Lord commanded.
EXO 8:16 And the Lord said to Moses, Speak thou to Aaron, Hold forth thy rod, and smite the dust of the earth, and little flies, or gnats, be in all the land of Egypt.
EXO 8:17 And they did so; and Aaron held forth the hand, and held the rod, and smote the dust of [[the]] earth; and gnats were made in men, and in work beasts; all the dust of the earth was turned into gnats by all the land of Egypt.
EXO 8:18 And the witches did in like manner by their enchantments, that they should bring forth gnats, and they might not; and gnats were as well in men as in work beasts.
EXO 8:19 And the witches said to Pharaoh, This is the finger of God. And the heart of Pharaoh was made hard, and he heard not them, as the Lord commanded.
EXO 8:20 And the Lord said to Moses, Rise thou early, and stand before Pharaoh, for he shall go out to the waters; and thou shalt say to him, The Lord saith these things, Deliver thou my people, that it make sacrifice to me;
EXO 8:21 that if thou wilt not deliver the people, lo! I shall send into thee, and into thy servants, and into thy people, and into thine houses, all the kinds of flies; and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full-filled with flies of diverse kinds, and all the land in which they shall be.
EXO 8:22 And in that day I shall make wonderful the land of Goshen, in which my people is, that flies be not there; and that thou know that I am the Lord in the midst of [[the]] earth;
EXO 8:23 and I shall set parting betwixt my people and thy people; this sign shall be tomorrow.
EXO 8:24 And the Lord did so. And a most grievous fly, that is, a multitude of flies, came into the house of Pharaoh, and into the houses of his servants, and into all the land of Egypt; and the land was corrupted of such flies.
EXO 8:25 And Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said to them, Go ye, make ye sacrifice to the Lord your God, in this land.
EXO 8:26 And Moses said, It may not be [[done]] so, for why shall we offer to the Lord our God the abominations of Egyptians; that if we shall slay before the Egyptians those things which they worship, they shall throw us down with stones.
EXO 8:27 We shall go the way of three days into wilderness, and we shall make sacrifice to our Lord God, as he commanded us.
EXO 8:28 And Pharaoh said, I shall deliver you, that ye make sacrifice to the Lord your God in desert; nevertheless go ye not further; pray ye for me.
EXO 8:29 And Moses said, I shall go out from thee, and I shall pray the Lord; and the fly, that is, the multitude of flies, shall go away from Pharaoh, and from his servants, and his people, tomorrow; nevertheless do not thou more deceive me, that thou deliver not the people to make sacrifice to the Lord.
EXO 8:30 And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and prayed the Lord,
EXO 8:31 the which did by the word of Moses, and took away the flies from Pharaoh, and from his servants, and from his people; none left, soothly not one.
EXO 8:32 And the heart of Pharaoh was made hard, so that he delivered not the people, soothly neither in this time.
EXO 9:1 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, Enter thou to Pharaoh, and speak thou to him, The Lord God of Hebrews saith these things, Deliver thou my people, that it make sacrifice to me;
EXO 9:2 that if thou forsakest yet, and withholdest them,
EXO 9:3 lo! mine hand shall be on thy fields, on the horses, and asses, and camels, and oxen, and sheep, a pestilence full grievous;
EXO 9:4 and the Lord shall make a marvellous thing betwixt the possessions of Israel and the possessions of the Egyptians, that utterly nothing perish of these things that pertain to the sons of Israel.
EXO 9:5 And the Lord ordained a time, and said, Tomorrow the Lord shall do this word in the land.
EXO 9:6 Therefore the Lord made this word in the tother day, and all the living beasts of the Egyptians were dead; forsooth utterly nothing perished of the beasts of the sons of Israel.
EXO 9:7 And Pharaoh sent to see, neither anything was dead of these things which Israel wielded; and the heart of Pharaoh was made full grievous, and he delivered not the people.
EXO 9:8 And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, Take ye your hands full of ashes of a chimney, and Moses sprinkle it into heaven before Pharaoh;
EXO 9:9 and be there dust on all the land of Egypt; for why botches shall be in men, and in work beasts, and swelling bladders shall be in all the land of Egypt.
EXO 9:10 And they took ashes of a chimney, and they stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it into heaven; and wounds of swelling bladders were made in men, and in work beasts;
EXO 9:11 and the witches might not stand before Moses, for the wounds, or sores, that were in them, and in all the land of Egypt.
EXO 9:12 And the Lord made hard the heart of Pharaoh, and he heard not them, as the Lord spake to Moses.
EXO 9:13 Also the Lord said to Moses, Rise thou early, and stand before Pharaoh, and thou shalt say to him, The Lord God of Hebrews saith these things, Deliver thou my people, that it make sacrifice to me;
EXO 9:14 for in this time I shall send all my vengeances on thine heart, and on thy servants, and on thy people, that thou know, that none is like me in all [[the]] earth.
EXO 9:15 For now I shall hold forth mine hand, and I shall smite thee and thy people with pestilence, and thou shalt perish from the earth;
EXO 9:16 forsooth therefore I have set thee, that I show my strength in thee, and that my name be told in each land.
EXO 9:17 Yet thou withholdest my people, and wilt not deliver it?
EXO 9:18 Lo! tomorrow, in this same hour, I shall rain full much hail, what manner hail was not in Egypt, from the day in which it was founded, till into this present time.
EXO 9:19 Therefore send thou right now, and gather thy work beasts, and all things that thou hast in the field; for men, and work beasts, and all things that be in fields withoutforth, and be not gathered from the fields, and [[the]] hail fall on those [[or them]], they shall die.
EXO 9:20 He that dreaded the word of the Lord, of the servants of Pharaoh, made his servants and work beasts flee into houses;
EXO 9:21 soothly he that despised the Lord’s word, left his servants and his work beasts in the fields.
EXO 9:22 And the Lord said to Moses, Hold forth thine hand into heaven, that hail be made in all the land of Egypt, on men, and on work beasts, and on each herb of the field in the land of Egypt.
EXO 9:23 And Moses held forth the rod into heaven; and the Lord gave thunders, and hail, and lightnings running about on the land; and the Lord rained hail on the land of Egypt;
EXO 9:24 and hail and fire meddled [[or mingled]] together were borne forth; and it was of so much greatness, how great appeared never before in all the land of Egypt, since that people was made.
EXO 9:25 And the hail smote in all the land of Egypt all things that were in the fields, from man till to work beast; and the hail smote all the herb of the field, and brake all the flax of the country;
EXO 9:26 only the hail felled not in the land of Goshen, where the sons of Israel were.
EXO 9:27 And Pharaoh sent, and called Moses and Aaron, and said to them, I have sinned also now; the Lord is just [[or rightwise]], and I and my people be wicked;
EXO 9:28 pray ye the Lord, that the thunders and hail of God cease, and I shall deliver you, and dwell ye no more here.
EXO 9:29 Moses said, When I shall go out of the city, I shall hold forth mine hands to the Lord, and [[the]] lightnings and thunders shall cease, and hail shall not be, that thou know, that the earth is the Lord’s;
EXO 9:30 forsooth I know, that thou and thy servants dread not yet the Lord [[God]].
EXO 9:31 Therefore the flax and barley was hurt, for the barley was green, and the flax had burgeoned then knops;
EXO 9:32 forsooth wheat and beans were not hurt, for those [[or they]] were late sown.
EXO 9:33 And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and from the city, and held forth his hands to the Lord, and thunders and hail ceased, and [[the]] rain dropped no more on the earth.
EXO 9:34 Soothly Pharaoh saw that the rain had ceased, and the hail, and thunders, and he increased sin; and the heart of him, and of his servants, was made grievous,
EXO 9:35 and his heart was made hard greatly; neither he let go the sons of Israel, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.
EXO 10:1 And the Lord said to Moses, Enter thou to Pharaoh, for I have made hard the heart of him, and of his servants, that I do these signs of me in him;
EXO 10:2 and that thou tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son’s sons, how oft I all-brake the Egyptians, and did signs in them; and that ye know that I am the Lord.
EXO 10:3 Therefore Moses and Aaron entered to Pharaoh, and said to him, The Lord God of Hebrews saith these things, How long wilt thou not be made subject to me? Deliver thou my people, that it make sacrifice to me;
EXO 10:4 else soothly if thou against-standest, and wilt not deliver it, lo! I shall bring in tomorrow a locust, that is, a multitude of locusts, into thy coasts,
EXO 10:5 that shall cover the over-part of the earth, neither anything thereof shall appear, but that, that was left of the hail shall be eaten of locusts; for the locusts shall gnaw all the trees that burgeon in [[the]] fields;
EXO 10:6 and they shall full-fill thine houses, and the houses of thy servants, and of all the Egyptians, how great thy fathers and thy grand-sires saw not, since they were born on earth, till into this present day. And Moses turned away himself, and went out from Pharaoh.
EXO 10:7 Forsooth the servants of Pharaoh said to him, How long shall we suffer this offense? Deliver the men, that they make sacrifice to their Lord God; seest thou not that Egypt hath perished?
EXO 10:8 And they again called Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh, and he said to them, Go ye, and make ye sacrifice to your Lord God; which be they, that shall go?
EXO 10:9 Moses said, We shall go with our little children and elders, and with sons, and daughters, with sheep, and great beasts; for it is the solemnity of our Lord God.
EXO 10:10 And Pharaoh answered, So the Lord be with you; how therefore shall I deliver you, and your little children? to whom is it doubtful, that ye think not the worst things?
EXO 10:11 It shall not be done so; but go ye men only, and make ye sacrifice to the Lord; for also ye asked this. And anon they were cast out from the sight of Pharaoh.
EXO 10:12 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, Hold forth thine hand on the land of Egypt, to a locust, that is, a multitude of locusts, that it ascend [[or go up]] on the land, and devour all the herb which is left of the hail.
EXO 10:13 And Moses held forth the rod on the land of Egypt, and the Lord brought in a burning wind all that day and night; and when the morrowtide was made, the burning wind raised [[up]] locusts,
EXO 10:14 which ascended [[or went up]] on all the land of Egypt, and sat in all the coasts of Egyptians; and the locusts were unnumberable, and such were not before that time, neither shall come afterward.
EXO 10:15 And those [[or they]] covered all the face of the earth, and wasted all things; therefore the herb of the earth was devoured, and whatever of apples was in trees, which the hail had left, it was devoured; and utterly no green thing was left in trees, and in herbs of the earth, in all Egypt.
EXO 10:16 Wherefore Pharaoh hasted, and called Moses and Aaron, and said to them, I have sinned against your Lord God, and against you;
EXO 10:17 but now forgive ye the sin to me; also in this time pray ye your Lord God, that he take away from me this death.
EXO 10:18 And Moses went out of the sight of Pharaoh, and prayed the Lord;
EXO 10:19 the which made a full strong wind to blow from the west, and it took, and cast the locusts into the Red Sea; soothly there left not one, in all the coasts of Egypt.
EXO 10:20 And the Lord made hard the heart of Pharaoh, and he let go not the sons of Israel.
EXO 10:21 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, Hold forth thine hand into heaven, and darkness/es be on the land of Egypt, so thick that they may be groped.
EXO 10:22 And Moses held forth his hand into heaven, and horrible darknesses were made in all the land of Egypt;
EXO 10:23 and in three days no man saw his brother, neither moved himself from that place in which he was. Wherever the children of Israel dwelled, light was.
EXO 10:24 And Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said to them, Go ye, make ye sacrifice to the Lord; only your sheep and your great beasts dwell still; your little children go with you.
EXO 10:25 And Moses said, Also thou shalt give to us offerings and burnt sacrifices, which we shall offer to our Lord God;
EXO 10:26 all the flocks shall go with us, for a claw shall not dwell of those things, that be needful into the worshipping of our Lord God, mostly since we know not what oweth to be offered, till we come to that place.
EXO 10:27 Forsooth the Lord made hard the heart of Pharaoh, and he would not deliver them.
EXO 10:28 And Pharaoh said to Moses, Go away from me, and beware that thou see no more my face; in whatever day thou shalt appear to me, thou shalt die.
EXO 10:29 Moses answered, Be it done so, as thou hast spoken; I shall no more see thy face.
EXO 11:1 And the Lord said to Moses, Yet I shall touch Pharaoh and Egypt with one vengeance, and after these things he shall deliver you, and he shall constrain you to go out.
EXO 11:2 Therefore thou shalt say to all the people, that a man ask of his friend, and a woman of her neighbouress, silver vessels and golden, and clothes;
EXO 11:3 forsooth the Lord shall give grace to his people before the Egyptians. And Moses was a full great man in the land of Egypt, before the servants of Pharaoh and all the people;
EXO 11:4 and he said, The Lord saith these things, At midnight I shall enter into Egypt;
EXO 11:5 and each first begotten thing in the land of Egyptians shall die, from the first begotten of Pharaoh, that sitteth in the throne of him, till to the first begotten of the handmaid, which is at [[the]] quern; and all the first engendered of beasts shall die;
EXO 11:6 and [[a]] great cry shall be in all the land of Egypt, what manner cry was not before, neither shall be afterward.
EXO 11:7 Forsooth at all the children of Israel, a dog shall not make privy noise, from man till to beast; that ye know by how great miracle the Lord parteth [[the]] Egyptians and Israel.
EXO 11:8 And all these thy servants shall come down to me, and they shall pray me, and shall say, Go out thou, and all the people which is subject to thee; after these things we shall go out. And Moses full wroth went out from Pharaoh.
EXO 11:9 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, Pharaoh shall not hear you, that many signs be made in the land of Egypt.
EXO 11:10 Soothly Moses and Aaron made all the signs and wonders, that be here written, before Pharaoh; and the Lord made hard the heart of Pharaoh, neither he delivered the sons of Israel from his land.
EXO 12:1 Also the Lord said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt,
EXO 12:2 This month, the beginning of months to you, shall be the first in the months of the year.
EXO 12:3 Speak ye to all the company of the sons of Israel, and say ye to them, In the tenth day of this month, each man take a lamb by his meines and houses;
EXO 12:4 but if the number is less, that it may not suffice to eat the lamb, he shall take it with his neighbour, which is joined to his house, by the number of souls, that may suffice to the eating of the lamb.
EXO 12:5 Forsooth the lamb shall be a male of one year, without wem; by which custom ye shall take also a kid, if a lamb may not be had in good manner;
EXO 12:6 and ye shall keep him till to the fourteenth day of this month; and all the multitude of the sons of Israel shall offer him at eventide.
EXO 12:7 And they shall take of his blood, and they shall put it on ever either doorpost, and in the lintels, or higher thresholds, of the houses, in which they shall eat him;
EXO 12:8 and in that night they shall eat flesh, roasted with fire, and therf loaves, with the herb lettuce or with bitternesses of the field.
EXO 12:9 Ye shall not eat thereof any raw thing, neither sodden in water, but roasted only by fire; ye shall devour the head with the feet, and with the entrails thereof;
EXO 12:10 neither anything thereof shall abide till to the morrowtide; if anything is left, ye shall burn it in the fire.
EXO 12:11 Forsooth thus ye shall eat him; ye shall gird your reins, and ye shall have shoes in your feet, and ye shall hold staves in your hands, and ye shall eat it hastily; for it is pask, that is, the passing [[forth]] of the Lord.
EXO 12:12 And I shall pass through the land of Egypt in that night, and I shall smite all the first engendered or the first begotten things in the land of Egypt, from man till to beast; and I the Lord shall make dooms in all the gods of Egypt.
EXO 12:13 Forsooth [[the]] blood shall be to you into sign, in the houses in which ye shall be; and I shall see the blood, and I shall pass over you; neither a wound destroying shall be in you, when I shall smite the land of Egypt.
EXO 12:14 Forsooth ye shall have this day into mind, and ye shall make it solemn to the Lord in your generations, by everlasting worshipping.
EXO 12:15 Seven days ye shall eat therf bread; in the first day nothing dighted with sourdough shall be in your houses; whoever shall eat anything dighted with sourdough, from the first day till to the seventh day, that soul shall perish from Israel.
EXO 12:16 The first day shall be holy and solemn, and the seventh day shall be worshipful by the same hallowing; ye shall not do any work in those days, except these things that pertain to meat;
EXO 12:17 and ye shall keep therf bread. For in that same day I shall lead out of the land of Egypt your host; and ye shall keep this day in your generations by everlasting custom.
EXO 12:18 In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, at eventide, ye shall eat therf bread, till to the one and twentieth day of the same month at eventide.
EXO 12:19 In seven days nothing dighted with sourdough shall be found in your houses; if any eateth anything dighted with sourdough, his soul shall perish from the company of Israel, as well of comelings, that be heathen men converted to the faith of Jews, as of them that be born in the land.
EXO 12:20 Ye shall not eat anything made with sourdough, and ye shall eat therf bread in all your dwelling places.
EXO 12:21 Forsooth Moses called all the elder men of the sons of Israel, and said to them, Go ye, and take ye a beast by your meines, and offer ye pask;
EXO 12:22 and dip ye a bundle of hyssop, in the blood which is in the threshold, either in a vessel beside the threshold, and sprinkle ye thereof on the lintel, and ever either doorpost; none of you shall go out at the door of his house till the morrowtide.
EXO 12:23 For the Lord shall pass [[forth]] smiting the Egyptians; and when he shall see the blood in the lintel, and in ever either doorpost, he shall pass over the door of the house; and he shall not suffer the smiter to enter into your houses, and to hurt you.
EXO 12:24 Keep thou this word; it shall be a lawful thing to thee and to thy sons till into without end.
EXO 12:25 And when ye shall enter into the land which the Lord shall give to you, as he promised, ye shall keep these ceremonies;
EXO 12:26 and when your sons shall say to you, What is this religion?
EXO 12:27 ye shall say to them, It is the sacrifice of the passing of the Lord, when he passed over the houses of the sons of Israel in Egypt, and smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people was bowed, and worshipped.
EXO 12:28 And the sons of Israel went out, and did as the Lord commanded to Moses and Aaron.
EXO 12:29 Forsooth it was done in the midst of the night, the Lord smote all the first begotten things in the land of Egypt, from the first begotten of Pharaoh, that sat in the throne of him, till to the first begotten of a captive woman, that was in prison, and all the first engendered of beasts.
EXO 12:30 And Pharaoh rose in the night, and all his servants, and all Egypt; and a great cry was made in Egypt; for none house was, in which a dead man lay not.
EXO 12:31 And when Moses and Aaron were called in the night, Pharaoh said, Rise ye, and go ye out from my people, both ye and the sons of Israel; go ye, offer ye to the Lord, as ye say;
EXO 12:32 take ye your sheep and [[your]] great beasts, as ye asked; and go ye, and bless ye me.
EXO 12:33 And the Egyptians constrained the people to go out of the land swiftly, and said, All we shall die!
EXO 12:34 Therefore the people took meal sprinkled together, before that it was dighted with sourdough; and they bound it in mantles, and put it on their shoulders.
EXO 12:35 And the sons of Israel did as the Lord commanded to Moses; and they asked of the Egyptians silver vessels and golden, and full much clothing.
EXO 12:36 Forsooth the Lord gave grace to the people before the Egyptians, that the Egyptians lent to them; and they made bare the Egyptians.
EXO 12:37 And the children of Israel went forth from Rameses into Succoth, almost six hundred thousand of footmen, without little children and women;
EXO 12:38 but also the common people of males and of females unnumberable went up with them; sheep, and oxen, and full many beasts of diverse kind also.
EXO 12:39 And they baked meal, which sprinkled altogether a while ago they took from Egypt, and made therf loaves baken under ashes; for the loaves might not be dighted with sourdough, for [[the]] Egyptians compelled them to go out, and suffered not them to make any tarrying, neither it was leisure to make any stew.
EXO 12:40 Forsooth the dwelling of the sons of Israel, by which they dwelled in Egypt, was of four hundred and thirty years;
EXO 12:41 and when those years were fulfilled, all the host of the Lord went out of the land of Egypt in the same day.
EXO 12:42 This night is worthy to be kept in the worshipping of the Lord, when he led them out of the land of Egypt; all the sons of Israel ought to keep this night in their generations.
EXO 12:43 Also the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, This is the religion of pask; each alien shall not eat thereof;
EXO 12:44 soothly each servant bought shall be circumcised, and so he shall eat;
EXO 12:45 a comeling and a hired man shall not eat thereof;
EXO 12:46 it shall be eaten in one house; neither ye shall bear out the flesh thereof; neither ye shall break a bone thereof.
EXO 12:47 Each company of the sons of Israel shall make that pask;
EXO 12:48 that if any pilgrim will pass into your faith and worshipping, and make [[the]] pask of the Lord, each male kind of him shall be circumcised before the solemnity, and then he shall make it lawfully, and he shall be together with them as a man born of the land; forsooth if any man is not circum-cised, he shall not eat thereof.
EXO 12:49 The same law shall be to a man born of the land, and to a comeling, that taketh your faith, the which is a pilgrim with you.
EXO 12:50 And all the sons of Israel did as the Lord commanded to Moses and Aaron.
EXO 12:51 And in the same day the Lord led out of the land of Egypt the sons of Israel, by their companies.
EXO 13:1 And the Lord spake to Moses, and said,
EXO 13:2 Hallow thou to me each first begotten thing that openeth the womb among the sons of Israel, as well of men as of beasts, for why all be mine.
EXO 13:3 And Moses said to the people, Have ye mind of this day, in which ye went out of Egypt, and of the house of servage, for in [[a]] strong hand the Lord led you out of this place, that ye eat no bread dighted with sourdough.
EXO 13:4 Today ye go out, in the month of new fruits;
EXO 13:5 and when the Lord hath led thee into the land of Canaanites, and of Hittites, and of Amorites, and of Hivites, and of Jebusites, which land he swore to thy fathers, that he should give to thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, thou shalt hallow this custom of holy things in this month.
EXO 13:6 Seven days thou shalt eat therf loaves, and the solemnity of the Lord shall be in the seventh day;
EXO 13:7 ye shall eat therf loaves seven days, nothing dighted with sourdough shall appear at thee, neither in all thy coasts.
EXO 13:8 And thou shalt tell to thy son in that day, and shalt say, This it is that the Lord did to me, when I went out of Egypt.
EXO 13:9 And it shall be as a sign in thine hand, and as a memorial before thine eyes, and that the law of the Lord be ever[[more]] in thy mouth; for in a strong hand the Lord led thee out of Egypt, and of the house of servage.
EXO 13:10 Thou shalt keep such a worship-ping in time ordained, from days into days, that is, from year into year.
EXO 13:11 And when the Lord hath brought thee into the land of Canaanites, as he swore to thee, and to thy fathers, and hath given it to thee,
EXO 13:12 thou shalt separate to the Lord all male thing that openeth the womb, and that that is first in thy beasts; whatever thing thou hast of male kind, thou shalt hallow it to the Lord.
EXO 13:13 Thou shalt exchange the first engendered of an ass for a sheep, that if thou again-buyest it not, thou shalt slay it; forsooth thou shalt again-buy with price all the first begotten of a man of thy sons.
EXO 13:14 And when thy son shall ask thee tomorrow, and say, What is this? thou shalt answer to him, In a strong hand the Lord led us out of the land of Egypt, of the house of servage;
EXO 13:15 for when Pharaoh was made hard in heart, and would not deliver us, the Lord slew all the first begotten thing in the land of Egypt, from the first begotten of man, till to the first engendered of beasts; therefore I offer to the Lord all thing of male kind that openeth the womb, and I again-buy all the first begotten things of my sons.
EXO 13:16 Therefore it shall be as a sign in thine hand, and as a thing hanged for mind before thine eyes, for in a strong hand the Lord led us out of Egypt.
EXO 13:17 Therefore when Pharaoh had sent out the people, God led not them out by the way of the land of Philistines, which is nigh; and areckoning lest peradventure it would repent the people, if he had seen battles rise against him, and the people would turn again into Egypt;
EXO 13:18 but God led the people about by the way of desert, which way is beside the Red Sea. And the sons of Israel were armed, and went up from the land of Egypt.
EXO 13:19 And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for he had charged the sons of Israel, and had said, God shall visit you, and bear ye out from hence my bones with you.
EXO 13:20 And they went forth from Succoth, and setted tents in Etham, in the last ends of the wilderness.
EXO 13:21 Forsooth the Lord went before them to show them the way, by day in a pillar of cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire, that he should be leader of the way in ever either time;
EXO 13:22 the pillar of cloud failed never by day, neither the pillar of fire by night, before the people.
EXO 14:1 Forsooth the Lord spake to Moses, and said,
EXO 14:2 Speak thou to the sons of Israel; turn they again, and set they tents even against Pihahiroth, which is betwixt Migdol and the sea, against Baalzephon; and in the sight thereof ye shall set tents on the sea.
EXO 14:3 And Pharaoh shall say on the sons of Israel, They be made strait in the land, the desert hath enclosed them altogether.
EXO 14:4 And I shall make hard his heart, and he shall pursue you, and I shall be glorified in Pharaoh, and in all his host; and the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord; and they did so.
EXO 14:5 And it was told to the king of the Egyptians, that the people had fled; and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was changed on the people, and they said, What would we do, that we let go Israel, that it should not serve us?
EXO 14:6 Therefore Pharaoh joined the chariot, and took with him all his people;
EXO 14:7 and he took six hundred chosen chariots, and whatever thing of chariots was in Egypt, and [[the]] dukes of all the host.
EXO 14:8 And the Lord made hard the heart of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and he pursued the sons of Israel; and they were gone out in an high hand.
EXO 14:9 And when the Egyptians pursued the steps of the sons of Israel before-going, they found them in tents on the sea; all the chivalry, and [[the]] chariots of Pharaoh, and all the host were in Pihahiroth, against Baalzephon.
EXO 14:10 And when Pharaoh had nighed, the sons of Israel raised [[up]] their eyes, and they saw the Egyptians behind them, and they dreaded greatly; and they cried to the Lord,
EXO 14:11 and said to Moses, In hap sepulchres were not in Egypt, therefore thou hast taken us away, that we shall die in wilderness? what wouldest thou do this, that thou leddest us out of Egypt?
EXO 14:12 Whether this is not the word that we spake to thee in Egypt, saying, Go away from us, that we serve the Egyptians? for it is much better to serve them, than to die in wilderness.
EXO 14:13 And Moses said to the people, Do not ye dread, stand ye, and see the great works of God, which he shall do today; for ye shall no more see the Egyptians, which ye see now, till into without end;
EXO 14:14 the Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall be still.
EXO 14:15 And the Lord said to Moses, What criest thou to me? Speak thou to the sons of Israel, that they go forth;
EXO 14:16 forsooth raise thou thy rod, and stretch forth thine hand on the sea, and part thou it, that the sons of Israel go in the midst of the sea, by dry place.
EXO 14:17 Forsooth I shall make hard the hearts of [[the]] Egyptians, that they pursue you, and I shall be glorified in Pharaoh, and in all the host of him, and in the chariots of him, and in the knights of him;
EXO 14:18 and [[the]] Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord God, when I shall be glorified in Pharaoh, and in the chariots, and in the knights of him.
EXO 14:19 And the angel of the Lord, that went before the castles or tents of Israel, took himself, and went behind them; and the pillar of cloud went together with him, and left the former things after the back,
EXO 14:20 and stood betwixt the castles [[or the tents]] of Egyptians and the castles [[or the tents]] of Israel; and the cloud was dark toward the Egyptians, and it was lightening the night toward Israel, so that in all the time of the night, they might not [[come]] nigh together to themselves.
EXO 14:21 And when Moses had stretched forth his hand on the sea, the Lord took away the sea, the while a great wind and a burning blew in all the night, and turned the sea into dryness; and the water was parted.
EXO 14:22 And the sons of Israel entered by the midst of the dry sea; for the water was as a wall at the right side, and the left side of them.
EXO 14:23 And the Egyptians pursued, and entered after them, all the riding of Pharaoh, his chariots, and [[his]] knights, by the midst of the sea.
EXO 14:24 And the watch of the morrowtide came then, and lo! the Lord beheld on the castles [[or the tents]] of the Egyptians, by a pillar of fire, and of cloud, and killed the host of them;
EXO 14:25 and he destroyed the wheels of [[the]] chariots, and those [[or they]] were borne into the depth. Therefore the Egyptians said, Flee we Israel; for the Lord fighteth for them against us.
EXO 14:26 And the Lord said to Moses, Hold forth thine hand on the sea, that the waters turn again to [[the]] Egyptians, on the chariots, and on the knights of them.
EXO 14:27 And when Moses had held forth his hand against the sea, it turned again first in the morrowtide to the former place; and when the Egyptians fled, the waters came against them, and the Lord wrapped them in the midst of the flood.
EXO 14:28 And the waters turned again, and covered the chariots, and [[the]] knights of all the host of Pharaoh, which pursued [[or were following]], and entered into the sea; soothly not one of them was left alive.
EXO 14:29 Forsooth the sons of Israel went through the midst of the dry sea, and the waters were to them as for a wall, on the right side, and on the left side.
EXO 14:30 And in that day the Lord delivered Israel from the hand of [[the]] Egyptians, and they saw the Egyptians dead on the brink of the sea,
EXO 14:31 and they saw the great hand, or power, or might, which the Lord had used against the Egyptians; and the people dreaded the Lord, and they believed to the Lord, and to Moses his servant.
EXO 15:1 Then Moses sang, and the sons of Israel, this song to the Lord; and they said, Sing we to the Lord, for he is magnified gloriously; he hath cast down the horse and the horseman into the sea.
EXO 15:2 My strength and my praising is the Lord; and he is made to me into health. This is my God, and I shall glorify him; the God of my father, and I shall enhance or exalt him.
EXO 15:3 The Lord is a man-fighter, his name is Almighty;
EXO 15:4 he casted down into the sea the chariots of Pharaoh, and his host. His chosen princes were drowned in the Red Sea or the Sea of Reeds;
EXO 15:5 the deep waters covered them; they went down into the depth as a stone.
EXO 15:6 Lord, thy right hand is magnified in strength; Lord, thy right hand smote the enemy.
EXO 15:7 And in the multitude of thy glory, thou hast put down all thine adver-saries; thou sentest thine ire, that devoured them as stubble.
EXO 15:8 And waters were gathered [[together]] in the spirit of thy strong vengeance; [[the]] flowing water stood, [[the]] deep waters were gathered [[together]] in the midst of the sea.
EXO 15:9 The enemy said, I shall pursue, and I shall overtake; I shall part spoils, my soul, that is, my will, shall be fulfilled. I shall draw out my sword; mine hand shall slay them.
EXO 15:10 Thy spirit blew, and the sea covered them; they were drowned as lead in great waters.
EXO 15:11 Lord, who is like thee in strong men, who is like thee? thou art a great doer in holiness; fearful, and praiseable, and doing miracles.
EXO 15:12 Thou heldest forth thine hand, and the earth devoured them;
EXO 15:13 thou were leader in thy mercy to thy people, which thou again-boughtest; and thou hast borne him in thy strength to thine holy dwelling place.
EXO 15:14 Peoples went up, and were wroth; sorrows held the dwellers of Philistia.
EXO 15:15 Then the princes of Edom were troubled; trembling held the strong men of Moab. All the dwellers of Canaan dreaded, or were encumbered;
EXO 15:16 inward dread fall on them, and outward dread in the greatness of thine arm. Be they made unmoveable as a stone, till thy people pass, Lord; till thy people pass, whom thou wield-edest.
EXO 15:17 Thou shalt bring them in, and thou shalt plant them in the hill of thine heritage; in the most steadfast dwelling place which thou hast wrought, Lord; Lord, thy saintuary, which thine hands made steadfast.
EXO 15:18 The Lord shall reign without end, and over all things.
EXO 15:19 Forsooth Pharaoh, on horse, entered with his chariots and [[his]] horsemen into the sea, and the Lord brought the waters of the sea on them; soothly the sons of Israel went by the dry place, in [[the]] midst of the sea.
EXO 15:20 Therefore Marie, the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a tympan in her hand, and all the women went out after her with tympans and companies;
EXO 15:21 to which she sang before, and said, Sing we to the Lord, for he is magnified gloriously; he hath cast down into the sea the horse and the rider of him.
EXO 15:22 Forsooth Moses took Israel from the Red Sea, and they went out into the desert of Shur; and they went three days by the wilderness, and they found not water.
EXO 15:23 And they came into Marah, and they might not drink the waters of Marah, for they were bitter; wherefore he putted a covenable name to the place, and called it Marah, that is, bitterness.
EXO 15:24 And the people grutched against Moses, and said, What shall we drink?
EXO 15:25 And Moses cried to the Lord, which showed to him a tree; and when he had put that tree into the waters, those [[or they]] were turned into sweetness. There the Lord ordained commandments and dooms to the people, and there he assayed the people,
EXO 15:26 and said, If thou shalt hear the voice of thy Lord God, and shalt do that that is rightful before him, and shalt obey to his commandments, and shalt keep all his behests, I shall not bring in on thee all the sickness, which I have put in Egypt, for I am thy Lord Saviour.
EXO 15:27 Forsooth the sons of Israel came into Elim, where were twelve wells of water, and seventy palm trees, and they setted tents beside the waters.
EXO 16:1 And they went forth from Elim, and all the multitude of the sons of Israel came into the desert of Sin, which is betwixt Elim and Sinai, in the fifteenth day of the second month, after that they went out of the land of Egypt.
EXO 16:2 And all the congregation of the sons of Israel grutched against Moses, and against Aaron, in the wilderness.
EXO 16:3 And the sons of Israel said to them, We would that we had been dead by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat on the flesh pots, and ate loaves in plenty; why led ye us into this desert, that ye should slay all the multitude with hunger?
EXO 16:4 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, Lo! I shall rain to you loaves from heaven; the people go out, that it gather those things that suffice by each day; that I assay the people, whether it go in my law, or not.
EXO 16:5 Soothly in the sixth day, make they ready that that they shall bear in, and be it double over that they were wont to gather by each day.
EXO 16:6 And Moses and Aaron said to all the sons of Israel, At eventide ye shall know that the Lord [[hath]] led you out of the land of Egypt;
EXO 16:7 and in the morrowtide ye shall see the glory of the Lord; for I heard your grutching against the Lord; soothly what be we, for ye grutch against us?
EXO 16:8 And Moses said, The Lord shall give to you at eventide flesh to eat, and loaves in the morrowtide in plenty, for he [[hath]] heard your grutchings, by which ye grutched against him; for why, what be we? your grutching is not against us, but against the Lord.
EXO 16:9 And Moses said to Aaron, Say thou to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, Nigh ye before the Lord, for he [[hath]] heard your grutching.
EXO 16:10 And when Aaron spake to all the company of the sons of Israel, they beheld to the wilderness, and lo! the glory of the Lord appeared in a cloud.
EXO 16:11 Forsooth the Lord spake to Moses, and said,
EXO 16:12 I heard the grutchings of the sons of Israel; speak thou to them, At eventide ye shall eat flesh, and in the morrowtide ye shall be filled with loaves, and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God.
EXO 16:13 Therefore eventide was made, and curlews went up, and covered the castles [[or the tents]]; and in the morrowtide dew came before the face of the castles [[or the tents]].
EXO 16:14 And when it had covered the earth, a little thing, and as pounded with a pestle, in the likeness of an hoarfrost on the earth, appeared in the wilderness.
EXO 16:15 And when the sons of Israel had seen that, they said together, Man na? which signifieth, What is this? for they wist not what it was. To whom Moses said, This is the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat.
EXO 16:16 This is the word which the Lord commanded, Each man gather thereof as much as it sufficeth to be eaten, omer by each head, by the number of your souls that dwell in the tabernacle, so ye shall take.
EXO 16:17 And the sons of Israel did so, and they gathered, one more, and another less;
EXO 16:18 and they meted [[or measured it]] at the measure of omer; neither he that gathered more had more, neither he that made ready less found less, but all gathered by that that they might eat.
EXO 16:19 And Moses said to them, No man leave thereof into the morrowtide;
EXO 16:20 which heard not him, but some of them left thereof till to the morrow-tide, and it began to boil with worms, and it was rotten; and Moses was wroth against them.
EXO 16:21 Forsooth all they gathered in the morrowtide as much as sufficed to be eaten; and when the sun was hot, it was molten or melted.
EXO 16:22 Soothly in the sixth day they gathered double meats, that is, two omers each man. Forsooth all the princes of the multitude came, and told to Moses,
EXO 16:23 which said to them, This it is that the Lord spake, The rest of the sabbath is hallowed to the Lord; do ye what-ever thing shall be wrought tomorrow, and seethe ye those things that shall be sodden; soothly whatever thing is residue, or left over, keep ye it till into the morrow.
EXO 16:24 And they did so as Moses commanded, and it was not rotten, neither a worm was found therein.
EXO 16:25 And Moses said, Eat ye that in this day, for it is the sabbath of the Lord, it shall not be found today in the field;
EXO 16:26 gather ye it in six days, forsooth the sabbath of the Lord is in the seventh day, therefore in that day it shall not be found.
EXO 16:27 The seventh day came, and some of the people went out to gather, and they found not.
EXO 16:28 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, How long will ye not keep my commandments, and my law?
EXO 16:29 See ye that the Lord gave to you the sabbath, and for that he hath given to you in the sixth day double meats; each man dwell at himself, no man go out of his place in the seventh day.
EXO 16:30 And the people kept sabbath in the seventh day.
EXO 16:31 And the house of Israel called the name thereof manna, which was white, as the seed of coriander, and the taste thereof was as of flour with honey.
EXO 16:32 Forsooth Moses said, This is the word which the Lord commanded, Fill thou an omer thereof, and be it kept into generations to coming [[or to come]] afterward, that they know the bread with which I fed you in wilder-ness, when ye were led out of the land of Egypt.
EXO 16:33 And Moses said to Aaron, Take thou a vessel, and put therein manna, as much as an omer may take, and put it before the Lord, to be kept into your generations,
EXO 16:34 as the Lord commanded to Moses; and Aaron put that to be kept in the tabernacle.
EXO 16:35 Forsooth the sons of Israel ate manna forty years, till they came into the land habitable, that is, able to be inhabited; they were fed with this meat, till they touched the coasts of the land of Canaan.
EXO 16:36 Forsooth omer is the tenth part of ephah.
EXO 17:1 Therefore all the multitude of the sons of Israel went forth from the desert of Sin, by their dwellings, by the word of the Lord, and setted tents in Rephidim, where was no water to the people to drink.
EXO 17:2 Which people chided against Moses, and said, Give water to us, that we drink. To whom Moses answered, What chide ye against me, and why tempt ye the Lord?
EXO 17:3 Therefore the people thirsted there for the scarceness of water, and they grutched against Moses, and said, Why madest thou us to go out of Egypt, to slay us, and our free children, and our beasts, for thirst?
EXO 17:4 Forsooth Moses cried to the Lord, and said, What shall I do to this people? yet a little, and it shall stone me.
EXO 17:5 The Lord said to Moses, Go thou before the people, and take with thee of the elder men of Israel, and take in thine hand the rod, with the which thou hast smitten the flood, and go;
EXO 17:6 lo! I shall stand there before thee, above the stone of Horeb, and thou shalt smite the stone, and water shall go out thereof, that the people drink. Moses did so before the elder men of Israel;
EXO 17:7 and he called the name of that place Temptation, for the chiding of the sons of Israel, and for they tempted the Lord, and said, Whether the Lord is in us, or nay?
EXO 17:8 Forsooth Amalek came, and fought against Israel in Rephidim.
EXO 17:9 And Moses said to Joshua, Choose thou men, and go out, and fight tomorrow against the men of Amalek; lo! I shall stand in the top of the hill, and I shall have the rod of God in mine hand.
EXO 17:10 Joshua did as Moses spake, and he fought against Amalek. Forsooth Moses, and Aaron, and Hur went up on the top of the hill;
EXO 17:11 and when Moses raised [[up]] his hands, Israel overcame; forsooth if he let them down a little, Amalek over-came.
EXO 17:12 Soothly Moses’ hands were made heavy, therefore they took a stone, and put under him, on which stone he sat. Forsooth Aaron and Hur sustained his hands, on ever either side; and it was done, that his hands were not made weary, till to the going down of the sun.
EXO 17:13 And Joshua drove away Amalek and his people, in the mouth of [[the]] sword, that is, by the sharpness of the sword, he killed all the strong men of Amalek in that battle.
EXO 17:14 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, Write thou this in a book, for mind, and take in the ears of Joshua; for I shall do away the mind of Amalek from under heaven.
EXO 17:15 And Moses builded an altar, and called the name thereof, The Lord is mine enhancer,
EXO 17:16 and he said, For it is the hand of the Lord alone, and the battle of God shall be against Amalek, from generation into generation.
EXO 18:1 And when Jethro, the priest of Midian, the ally, either father of the wife of Moses, had heard all things which God had done to Moses, and to Israel his people, for the Lord had led Israel out of the land of Egypt,
EXO 18:2 Jethro took Zipporah, Moses’ wife, whom Moses had sent again,
EXO 18:3 and his two sons, of which one was called Gershom, for the father at his birth said, I was a comeling in an alien land,
EXO 18:4 forsooth the tother was called Eliezer, for Moses at his birth said, God of my father is mine helper, and he delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh.
EXO 18:5 Therefore Jethro, ally of Moses, came, and the sons of Moses and his wife came to Moses, into desert, where Jethro set tents beside the hill of God;
EXO 18:6 and he sent to Moses, and said, I Jethro, thine ally, come to thee, and thy wife, and thy two sons with her.
EXO 18:7 And Moses went out into the coming of his ally, and worshipped or honoured, and kissed him, and they greeted themselves together with peaceable words. And when Jethro had entered into the tabernacle,
EXO 18:8 Moses told to him all things which God had done to Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians, for Israel, and he told to him all the travail that befell to them in the way, of which the Lord had delivered them.
EXO 18:9 And Jethro was glad on all the goods which the Lord had done to Israel, for he [[had]] delivered Israel from the hand of [[the]] Egyptians.
EXO 18:10 And Jethro said, Blessed be the Lord, that delivered you from the hands of the Egyptians, and from the hand of Pharaoh, the which Lord delivered his people from the hand or power of Egypt;
EXO 18:11 now I know that the Lord is great above all gods, for they did proudly against them.
EXO 18:12 Therefore Jethro, ally of Moses, offered burnt sacrifices and offerings to God; and Aaron, and all the elder men of Israel, came to eat bread with Jethro before God.
EXO 18:13 Forsooth in the tother day, Moses sat that he should deem the people, which stood nigh to Moses, from the morrowtide till to the eventide.
EXO 18:14 And when his ally had seen this, that is, all things which he did in the people, he said, What is this that thou doest in the people? why sittest thou alone, and all the people abideth thee from the morrowtide till to eventide?
EXO 18:15 To whom Moses answered, The people cometh to me, and asketh the sentence of God;
EXO 18:16 and when any strife befalleth to them, they come to me, that I deem betwixt them, and show the command-ments of God, and his laws.
EXO 18:17 And Jethro said, Thou doest a thing that is not good,
EXO 18:18 thou art wasted with a fond [[or folly]] travail, both thou, and this people that is with thee; the work is above thy strengths, thou alone mayest not suffer it.
EXO 18:19 But hear thou my words, and my counsels, and the Lord shall be with thee; be thou to the people in these things that pertain to God, that thou tell the things that be said to the people;
EXO 18:20 and show to the people the ceremonies, and [[the]] customs of worshipping, and the way by which they owe to go, and the work which they owe to do.
EXO 18:21 Forsooth purvey thou of all the people wise men, and dreading God, in which is truth, and which hate avarice; and ordain thou of them tribunes [[or rulers upon thousands]], and centurions [[or rulers upon hundreds]], and quinquagenaries [[or rulers upon fifty]], and deans [[or rulers upon ten]],
EXO 18:22 which shall deem the people in all time; soothly whatever thing is greater, tell they to thee, and deem they only [[the]] lesser things, and be it easier to thee, when the burden is parted into other men.
EXO 18:23 If thou shalt do this, thou shalt fulfill the commandment of God, and thou shalt be able to bear his com-mandments; and all this people shall turn again with peace to their places.
EXO 18:24 And when these things were heard, Moses did all things which Jethro counselled.
EXO 18:25 And when noble men of all Israel were chosen, Moses ordained them princes of the people, tribunes [[or rulers upon thousands]], and centurions [[or rulers upon hundreds]], and quin-quagenaries [[or rulers upon fifty]], and deans [[or rulers upon ten]],
EXO 18:26 which deemed the people in all time; forsooth, whatever thing was harder, they told to Moses, and they deemed [[the]] easier things only.
EXO 18:27 And Moses let go his ally, which turned again, and went into his land.
EXO 19:1 In the third month of the going of Israel out of the land of Egypt, in this day they came into the wilderness of Sinai;
EXO 19:2 for they went forth from Rephidim, and came till into the desert of Sinai, and they setted tents in the same place; and there Israel setted tents, even against the hill.
EXO 19:3 Forsooth Moses went up into the hill to God; and the Lord called him from the mount, and said, Thou shalt say these things to the house of Jacob, and thou shalt tell to the sons of Israel,
EXO 19:4 Ye yourselves have seen what things I have done to [[the]] Egyptians, how I bare you on the wings of eagles, and took you to me.
EXO 19:5 Therefore if ye shall hear my voice, and shall keep my covenant, ye shall be to me into a specialty of all peoples, that is, a thing loved excellently; for all the earth is mine;
EXO 19:6 and ye shall be to me into a realm of priesthood, and an holy folk; these be the words which thou shalt speak to the sons of Israel.
EXO 19:7 Moses came, and when the greater men in birth of the people were called together, he expounded all the words which the Lord commanded him.
EXO 19:8 And all the people answered together, We shall do all [[the]] things which the Lord hath spoken. And when Moses had told the words of the people to the Lord,
EXO 19:9 the Lord said to him, Right now I shall come to thee in the darkness of a cloud, that the people hear me speaking to thee, and believe to thee without end. Therefore Moses told the words of the people to the Lord,
EXO 19:10 which said to Moses, Go thou to the people, and make them holy today and tomorrow, and wash they their clothes,
EXO 19:11 and be they ready into the third day; for in the third day the Lord shall come down before all the people on the hill of Sinai.
EXO 19:12 And thou shalt set terms to the people, by compass; and thou shalt say to them, Be ye ware, that ye go not up into the hill, neither touch ye the ends thereof; each man that shall touch the hill, shall die by death.
EXO 19:13 Hands shall not touch him, but he shall be oppressed with stones, or he shall be pierced with darts; whether it shall be a beast, or a man, it shall not live; when a clarion shall begin to sound, then go they up into the hill.
EXO 19:14 And Moses came down from the hill to the people, and hallowed it; and when they had washed their clothes,
EXO 19:15 he said to them, Be ye ready into the third day; nigh ye not to your wives.
EXO 19:16 And now the third day was come, and the morrowtide was clear; and, lo! thunders began to be heard, and lightnings to shine, and a most thick cloud to cover the mountain; and the sounding of a clarion made noise full greatly, and the people dreaded, that was in the tents.
EXO 19:17 And when Moses had led them out into the coming of God, from the place of the tents, they stood at the roots of the hill.
EXO 19:18 Forsooth all the hill of Sinai smoked, for the Lord had come down thereon in fire; and the smoke thereof went up as of a furnace, and all the hill was fearful;
EXO 19:19 and the sound of a clarion increased little and little, and it was holden forth longer. Moses spake, and the Lord answered him,
EXO 19:20 and the Lord came down on the hill of Sinai, in that top of the hill, and he called Moses to the top thereof. And when he had gone up thither,
EXO 19:21 the Lord said to him, Go thou down, and witness thou to the people, lest peradventure it will pass [[over]] the terms to see the Lord, and [[a]] full great multitude thereof perish;
EXO 19:22 and [[the]] priests, that nigh to the Lord, be they hallowed, lest I smite them.
EXO 19:23 And Moses said to the Lord, The common people may not go up into the hill of Sinai; for thou hast witnessed, and hast commanded, saying, Set thou terms about the hill, and hallow it.
EXO 19:24 To whom the Lord said, Go thou down, and thou shalt go up, and bring Aaron with thee; forsooth the priests and the people pass not over the terms, neither go they up to the Lord, lest peradventure he slay them.
EXO 19:25 Moses went down to the people, and told all things to them.
EXO 20:1 And the Lord spake all these words,
EXO 20:2 I am thy Lord God, that led thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of servage.
EXO 20:3 Thou shalt not have alien gods before me.
EXO 20:4 Thou shalt not make to thee a graven image, neither any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, and that is in earth beneath, neither of those things that be in waters under the earth;
EXO 20:5 thou shalt not bow down to them, neither worship them; for I am thy Lord God, a strongly jealous lover; I visit the wickedness of fathers in children into the third and fourth generation of them that hated me,
EXO 20:6 and I do mercy into thousands, to them that love me, and keep my behests.
EXO 20:7 Thou shalt not take in vain the name of thy Lord God, for the Lord shall not have him guiltless, that taketh in vain the name of his Lord God.
EXO 20:8 Have thou mind, that thou hallow the sabbath day;
EXO 20:9 in six days thou shalt work, and do all thy works;
EXO 20:10 forsooth in the seventh day is the sabbath of thy Lord God; thou shalt not do any work on that day, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thine handmaid, thy work beast, and the comeling that is within thy gates;
EXO 20:11 for in six days God made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things that be in those [[or them]], and rested in the seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.
EXO 20:12 Honour thy father and thy mother, that thou be long living on the land, which thy Lord God shall give to thee.
EXO 20:13 Thou shalt not slay.
EXO 20:14 Thou shalt not do lechery.
EXO 20:15 Thou shalt not do theft.
EXO 20:16 Thou shalt not speak false witness-ing [[or false witness]] against thy neigh-bour.
EXO 20:17 Thou shalt not covet the house of thy neighbour, neither thou shalt desire his wife, nor his servant, nor his handmaid, nor his ox, nor his ass, neither all things that be his.
EXO 20:18 Forsooth all the people heard voices, that is, the thunder, and saw lamps, that is, shining lights, and the sound of a clarion, and the hill smoking; and they were afeared, and shaken with inward dread, and stood afar,
EXO 20:19 and said to Moses, Speak thou to us, and we shall hear; the Lord speak not to us, lest peradventure we die.
EXO 20:20 And Moses said to the people, Do not ye dread, for God came to prove you, and that his dread should be in you, and that ye should not do sin.
EXO 20:21 And the people stood afar; and Moses nighed to the darkness, wherein God was.
EXO 20:22 And the Lord said furthermore to Moses, Thou shalt say these things to the sons of Israel, Ye saw that from heaven I have spoken to you;
EXO 20:23 ye shall not make gods of silver, neither ye shall make to you gods of gold.
EXO 20:24 Ye shall make an altar of earth to me, and ye shall offer thereon your burnt sacrifices, and peaceable sacrifices, your sheep, and oxen; in each place in which the mind of my name shall be, I shall come to thee, and I shall bless thee.
EXO 20:25 That if thou shalt make an altar of stone to me, thou shalt not build it of stones hewn; for if thou shalt raise thy knife thereupon, or other instrument wherewith blood may be shed out, it shall be polluted.
EXO 20:26 Thou shalt not go up by degrees to mine altar, lest thy filthhood be showed.
EXO 21:1 These be the dooms, which thou shalt set forth to them.
EXO 21:2 If thou buyest an Hebrew servant, he shall serve thee six years; in the seventh year he shall go out free, without price;
EXO 21:3 with what manner clothes he entered, with such clothes go he out; if he entered having a wife, also the wife shall go out together with him.
EXO 21:4 But if the lord of a servant gave a wife to him, and she childed sons and daughters, the woman and her children shall be her lord’s; soothly the servant shall go out with his own clothes.
EXO 21:5 And if the servant saith, I love my lord, and my wife, and children, I will not go out free;
EXO 21:6 his lord shall bring him to [[the]] gods, that is, judges; and he shall be set to the door, and to the doorposts; and his lord shall pierce his ear with an awl, and he shall be servant to him till into the world.
EXO 21:7 If any man selleth his daughter into a servantess, she shall not go out as handmaids were wont to go out;
EXO 21:8 if she displeaseth in the eyes of her lord, to whom she was betaken, he shall deliver her; soothly he shall not have power to sell her to an alien people, if he forsaketh her.
EXO 21:9 Forsooth if he weddeth her to his son, he shall do to her by the custom of daughters;
EXO 21:10 and if he take with this handmaid another woman, or wife, to his son, he shall purvey to the first damsel, or handmaid, weddings, and clothes, and he shall not deny her the price of her chastity, that is, the hour of yielding debt.
EXO 21:11 If he doeth not to her these three, she shall go out freely without money.
EXO 21:12 He that smiteth a man, and will slay him, die he by death;
EXO 21:13 forsooth if a man setteth not ambush, but God betook him into his hands, I shall ordain a place to thee, whither he oweth to flee.
EXO 21:14 If any man slayeth his neighbour by before-casting, and by ambush, draw thou him away from mine altar, that he die.
EXO 21:15 He that smiteth his father, or his mother, die he by death.
EXO 21:16 He that curseth his father, or mother, die he by death.
EXO 21:17 He that stealeth a man, and selleth him, if he is convicted of the guilt, die he by death.
EXO 21:18 If men chide, and the tother smite his neighbour with a stone, or with the fist, and he is not dead, but lieth in the bed,
EXO 21:19 if he riseth, and goeth forth on his staff, he that smote shall be innocent; so nevertheless that he restore to him for his travails, and his costs in leeches.
EXO 21:20 He that smiteth his servant, or handmaid, with a rod, and they be dead in his hands, he shall be guilty of the crime, or hideous trespass.
EXO 21:21 Soothly if the servant liveth over this beating one day, or twain [[or two]], the smiter shall not be subject to the pain of death, for the servant is his master’s chattel.
EXO 21:22 If men chide, and a man smiteth a woman with child, and soothly he maketh the child dead-born, but the woman liveth over that smiting, he shall be subject to the harm, as much as the woman’s husband asketh, and as the judges deem.
EXO 21:23 Soothly if the death of her pursueth [[or follow]], he shall yield life for life,
EXO 21:24 eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
EXO 21:25 burning for burning, wound for wound, sore for sore.
EXO 21:26 If a man smiteth the eye of his servant, either of his handmaid, and maketh them one-eyed, he shall deliver them free for the eye which he put out.
EXO 21:27 Also if he smite out a tooth of his servant, or [[his]] handmaid, in like manner he shall deliver them free.
EXO 21:28 If an ox smiteth with his horn either man, or woman, and they be dead, the ox shall be thrown down with stones, and his flesh shall not be eaten, and the lord of the ox shall be guiltless.
EXO 21:29 That if the ox was an horn-putter from yesterday and the third day ago, and men warned his lord, neither the lord enclosed him, and he slayeth a man, or a woman, both the ox shall be thrown adown with stones, and they shall slay his lord;
EXO 21:30 that if the price be put to the lord, he shall give for his life whatever he is asked.
EXO 21:31 And if he smiteth with horn a man’s son, and his daughter, his lord shall be subject to the same sentence.
EXO 21:32 If the ox assaileth a manservant, and an handmaid, the lord of the ox shall give thirty shekels of silver to the lord of that servant; forsooth the ox shall be oppressed with stones.
EXO 21:33 If any man openeth a cistern, or a pit, and diggeth it, and covereth it not, and an ox either an ass falleth into it,
EXO 21:34 the lord of the cistern shall yield the price of the beasts; forsooth that that is dead shall be his.
EXO 21:35 If one man’s ox woundeth the ox of another man, and he is dead, they shall sell the quick ox, and they shall part [[or divide]] the price; soothly they shall part betwixt them the carcass of the dead ox.
EXO 21:36 Forsooth if the lord knew, that his ox was a horn-putter from yesterday and the third day ago, and kept not him in, he shall yield ox for ox, and he shall take the whole dead carcass.
EXO 22:1 If any man stealeth a sheep, or ox, and slayeth, or selleth, he shall restore five oxen for one ox, and four sheep for one sheep.
EXO 22:2 And if a night thief breaking into an house, either undermining, is found, and he taken is dead by a wound, or hurt, the smiter shall not be guilty of his blood, or death;
EXO 22:3 that if he did this when the sun was risen, he did manslaying, and he shall die. If a thief have not that, that he shall yield for [[the]] theft, he shall be sold;
EXO 22:4 if that thing that he stole, is found quick at him, either ox, either ass, either sheep, he shall restore the double.
EXO 22:5 If a man harmeth a field, or a vinery [[or vineyard]], and suffereth his beast, that it waste other men’s things, he shall restore for the value of [[the]] harm, the best things what-ever he hath in his field, either in his vinery [[or vineyard]].
EXO 22:6 If fire goeth out, and findeth, or burneth, ears of corn, and catcheth heaps of corn, or corns standing in fields, he that kindled the fire shall yield the harm.
EXO 22:7 If a man betaketh into keeping money to a friend, or a vessel, and it is taken away by theft from him that received it, if the thief is found, he shall restore the double.
EXO 22:8 If the thief is hid, or unknown, the lord of the house that received that good shall be brought to the gods, that is, to judges, and he shall swear, that he held not forth his hand into his neighbour’s thing, to defraud;
EXO 22:9 as well in ox, as in ass, and in sheep, and in clothes; and in what-ever thing may bring in harm, the cause of ever either shall come to the judges, and if they deem him guilty, he shall restore the double to his neighbour.
EXO 22:10 If any man betaketh to his neighbour ox, ass, sheep, and all work beast to keeping, and it is dead, or is made feeble, or is taken of enemies, and no man seeth this,
EXO 22:11 an oath shall be in the midst, that he held not forth his hand to the impairing of his neighbour’s thing; and the lord that owned that good shall receive his oath, and he to whom it was taken shall not be compelled to yield, or restore it.
EXO 22:12 That if it is taken away by theft, he shall restore the harm to the lord;
EXO 22:13 if it is eaten of a beast, he shall bring to the lord that that is slain, and he shall not restore it otherwise.
EXO 22:14 He that asketh of his neighbour anything of these foresaid things by borrowing, and it is enfeebled, either dead, while the lord thereof is not present, he shall be constrained to yield it;
EXO 22:15 that if the lord is in presence, he shall not restore it, mostly if it came hired, that is, if to hire he took it, for meed of his work.
EXO 22:16 If a man deceiveth a virgin not yet wedded, and sleepeth with her, he shall give dower to her, and shall have her to wife.
EXO 22:17 If the father of the virgin will not give her to him, he shall give money, by the manner of dower, which virgins were wont to take.
EXO 22:18 Thou shalt not suffer witches to live.
EXO 22:19 He that doeth lechery with a beast, die he by death.
EXO 22:20 He that offereth to gods, except to the Lord alone, be he slain.
EXO 22:21 Thou shalt not make sorrowful a comeling, neither thou shalt torment him; for also ye were comelings in the land of Egypt.
EXO 22:22 Ye shall not harm a widow, and a fatherless or a motherless child.
EXO 22:23 If ye hurt them, they shall cry to me, and I shall hear the cry of them,
EXO 22:24 and my great vengeance shall have indignation on you, and I shall smite you with sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your sons shall be fatherless.
EXO 22:25 If thou givest money to loan to my poor people, that dwelleth with thee, thou shalt not constrain him as an extortioner doeth, neither thou shalt oppress him by usuries.
EXO 22:26 If thou takest of thy neighbour a cloth to wed or a cloak for a pledge, thou shalt yield it to him before the going down of the sun;
EXO 22:27 for that alone is the clothing of his flesh, with which he is covered, neither he hath another, in which he shall sleep; if he crieth to me, I shall hear him; for I am merciful.
EXO 22:28 Thou shalt not backbite [[the]] gods, that is, priests, or judges, and thou shalt not curse the prince of thy people.
EXO 22:29 Thou shalt not tarry to offer to the Lord thy tithes, and thy first fruits. Thou shalt give to me the first begotten of thy sons;
EXO 22:30 also of [[thine]] oxen, and of sheep, thou shalt do in like manner; seven days be he with his mother, in the eighth day thou shalt yield him to me.
EXO 22:31 Ye shall be holy men to me; ye shall not eat the flesh that is before-tasted of beasts, but ye shall cast it forth to hounds.
EXO 23:1 Thou shalt not receive a voice of leasing, thou shalt not raise thine hand, that is, make covenant, either promise, that thou say false witnessing for a wicked man.
EXO 23:2 Thou shalt not follow a company to do evil, neither thou shalt assent to the sentence of full many men in doom, that thou go away from truth.
EXO 23:3 Also thou shalt not have mercy of a poor man in a cause, or doom.
EXO 23:4 If thou meetest thine enemy’s ox, either his ass, straying, lead it again to him.
EXO 23:5 If thou seest that the ass of him that hateth thee lieth under a burden, thou shalt not pass by, but thou shalt raise up it with him.
EXO 23:6 Thou shalt not bow [[away]]from truth in the doom of a poor man.
EXO 23:7 Thou shalt flee leasing. Thou shalt not slay an innocent man, and just [[or rightwise]]; for I am adversary to a wicked man.
EXO 23:8 Take thou not gifts, that blind, yea, prudent men, and destroy the words of just [[or rightwise]] men.
EXO 23:9 Thou shalt not be dis-easeful of a pilgrim, for ye know the souls of comelings, for also ye were pilgrims in the land of Egypt.
EXO 23:10 Six years thou shalt sow thy land, and thou shalt gather [[the]] fruits thereof;
EXO 23:11 forsooth in the seventh year thou shalt leave it, and make it to rest, that the poor men of thy people eat, and whatever is left ungathered, the beasts of the field eat it; so thou shalt do in thy vinery [[or vineyard]], and in the place of thine olive trees.
EXO 23:12 Six days thou shalt work, and in the seventh day thou shalt cease, that thine ox, and thine ass rest, and the son of thine handmaid, and the comeling be refreshed.
EXO 23:13 Keep ye all things, which I [[have]] said to you; and ye shall not swear by the name of alien gods, neither it shall be heard of your mouth.
EXO 23:14 In three times by all years ye shall hallow feasts to me.
EXO 23:15 Thou shalt keep the solemnity of therf loaves; seven days thou shalt eat therf bread, as I commanded to thee, in the time of [[the]] month of new things, when thou wentest out of Egypt; thou shalt not appear void in my sight.
EXO 23:16 And thou shalt keep the solemnity of the month of the first things of thy works, whatever things thou hast sown in the field. Also thou shalt keep the solemnity in the going out of the year, when thou hast gathered all thy fruits of the field.
EXO 23:17 Thrice in the year all thy male kind shall appear before thy Lord God.
EXO 23:18 Thou shalt not offer the blood of thy slain sacrifice on sourdough; neither the fatness of my solemnity shall dwell till to the morrowtide.
EXO 23:19 Thou shalt bear the first things of the fruits of thy land into the house of thy Lord God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in the milk of his mother.
EXO 23:20 Lo! I send mine angel, that shall go before thee, and shall keep thee in the way, and shall lead thee to the place which I have made ready to thee.
EXO 23:21 Take thou heed to him, and hear thou his voice, neither guess thou him to be despised, or despisable; for he shall not forgive, when thou sinnest, and my name is in him.
EXO 23:22 For if thou hearest his voice, and doest all things which I speak, I shall be enemy to thine enemies, and I shall torment them, that torment thee;
EXO 23:23 and mine angel shall go before thee, and he shall lead in thee to Amorites, and Hittites, and Perizzites, and Canaanites, and Hivites, and Jebus-ites, which I shall break, or destroy.
EXO 23:24 Thou shalt not honour the gods of them, neither thou shalt worship them; thou shalt not do the works of them, but thou shalt destroy their gods, and thou shalt break the images of them.
EXO 23:25 And ye shall serve to your Lord God, that I bless thy loaves, and thy waters, and do away sickness from the midst of thee;
EXO 23:26 neither a woman unfruitful, neither barren, shall be in thy land; I shall fulfill the number of thy days.
EXO 23:27 I shall send my dread into thy before-going, and I shall slay all the people, to which thou shalt enter, and I shall turn the backs of all thine enemies before thee;
EXO 23:28 and I shall send out before thee crabrones, or stinging flies, that shall drive away Hivite, and Canaanite, and Hittite, before that thou enter.
EXO 23:29 I shall not cast them out from thy face in one year, lest the land be turned into wilderness, and beasts increase against thee;
EXO 23:30 little and little I shall cast them out from thy sight, till thou be increased, and wield the land.
EXO 23:31 Forsooth and I shall set thy terms from the Red Sea till to the sea of Palestines, and from the desert till to the flood. I shall give into your hands the dwellers of the land, and I shall cast them out from your sight;
EXO 23:32 thou shalt not make bond of peace with them, neither with their gods.
EXO 23:33 Dwell they not in thy land, lest peradventure they make thee to do sin against me; if thou servest their gods, which thing certainly shall be to thee into cause of stumbling.
EXO 24:1 Also he said to Moses, Go thou up to the Lord, thou, and Aaron, and Nadab, and Abihu, and [[the]] seventy elder men of Israel; and ye shall worship afar,
EXO 24:2 and Moses alone go up to the Lord, and they shall not nigh, neither the people shall go up with him.
EXO 24:3 Therefore Moses came, and told to the people all the words and the dooms of the Lord; and all the people answered with one voice, We shall do all the words of the Lord which he hath spoken.
EXO 24:4 Forsooth Moses wrote all the words of the Lord; and he rose early, and builded an altar to the Lord at the roots of the hill, and he builded twelve titles, or stones, by twelve lineages of Israel.
EXO 24:5 And he sent young men of the sons of Israel, and they offered burnt sacrifices, and peaceable sacrifices to the Lord, twelve calves/two calves.
EXO 24:6 And so Moses took half the part of the blood, and put it into great cups; forsooth he shedded or poured the residue part on the altar.
EXO 24:7 And he took the book of the bond of peace, and read [[it]], while the people heard; the which said, We shall do all things that the Lord spake, and we shall be obedient.
EXO 24:8 Forsooth Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, This is the blood of the bond of peace, which the Lord covenanted with you on all these words.
EXO 24:9 And Moses, and Aaron, and Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elder men of Israel went up,
EXO 24:10 and saw [[the]] God of Israel; under his feet, they saw as the work of a sapphire stone, and as heaven when it is clear.
EXO 24:11 And he sent not his hand on the lords of the sons of Israel, that had gone far away; and they saw God, and ate and drank.
EXO 24:12 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, Come thou up to me into the hill, and be thou there, and I shall give to thee tables of stone, and the law, and commandments, which I have written, that thou teach them.
EXO 24:13 [[And]] Moses and Joshua, his minister or servant, rose, and Moses went up into the hill of God,
EXO 24:14 and said to the elder men, Abide ye here, till we turn again to you; ye have Aaron and Hur with you, if anything of question be made, ye shall tell [[it]] to them.
EXO 24:15 And when Moses had gone up, a cloud covered the hill,
EXO 24:16 and the glory of the Lord dwelled upon Sinai, and covered it with a cloud six days; forsooth in the seventh day, the Lord called him from the midst of the cloud;
EXO 24:17 forsooth the likeness of the glory of the Lord was as fire burning on the top of the hill in the sight of the sons of Israel.
EXO 24:18 And Moses entered into the midst of the cloud, and went up into the hill, and he was there forty days and forty nights.
EXO 25:1 And the Lord spake to Moses, and said,
EXO 25:2 Speak thou to the sons of Israel, that they take to me the first fruits; of each man that offereth willfully, ye shall take those [[things]].
EXO 25:3 Forsooth these things it be, which ye shall take, gold, and silver, and brass,
EXO 25:4 and jacinth, and purple, and red silk twice-dyed, and bis, that is, white silk, [[and]] hairs of goats,
EXO 25:5 and skins of wethers made red, and skins of jacinth, and wood of shittim,
EXO 25:6 and oil to lights to be ordained, sweet smelling spiceries into ointment, and incense of good odour,
EXO 25:7 onyx stones, and gems to adorn ephod, that is, a chasuble, and the rational, that is, an ouch hanging on the priest’s breast, in which was written doom and truth.
EXO 25:8 And they shall make a saintuary to me, and I shall dwell in the midst of them,
EXO 25:9 by all the likeness of the taber-nacle that I shall show to thee, and of all the vessels of [[the]] adorning thereof.
EXO 25:10 And thus ye shall make it; join together an ark, or a coffer, of the wood of shittim, whose length shall have two cubits and an half, the breadth shall have one cubit and an half, the height in like manner one cubit and an half.
EXO 25:11 And thou shalt overgild it with cleanest gold within and without; and thou shalt make a golden crown above by compass,
EXO 25:12 and four golden rings, which thou shalt set by [[the]] four corners of the ark; two rings be in [[the]] one side, and two rings in the other side.
EXO 25:13 Also thou shalt make bars of the wood of shittim, and thou shalt cover them with gold,
EXO 25:14 and thou shalt bring in by the rings that be in the sides of the ark, that it be borne in them,
EXO 25:15 the which bars shall ever[[more]] be in the rings, neither they shall any time be drawn out of them.
EXO 25:16 And thou shalt put into the ark the witnessing, that is, law, which I shall give to thee.
EXO 25:17 And thou shalt make a propiti-atory of cleanest gold; that is, a table covering the ark, [[or a place of purchasing mercy]]; the length thereof shall hold two cubits and an half, [[and]] the breadth shall hold one cubit and an half.
EXO 25:18 Also thou shalt make on ever either side of God’s answering place, two cherubims [[or cherubim]] of gold, and beaten out with an hammer;
EXO 25:19 one cherub be on one side of God’s answering place, and the tother in the tother side; cover they ever either side of the propitiatory,
EXO 25:20 and hold they forth their wings, and cover they God’s answering place; and behold they themselves together, while their faces be turned in to the propitiatory,
EXO 25:21 with which the ark of the Lord shall be covered, in which ark thou shalt put the witnessing [[or the testimony]], that is, the tables of the law, that I shall give to thee.
EXO 25:22 From thence I shall command, and I shall speak to thee above the propitiatory, that is, from the midst of [[the]] two cherubims [[or cherubim]], that shall be on the ark of witnessing, all things which I shall command by thee to the sons of Israel.
EXO 25:23 Also thou shalt make a board of the wood of shittim, having two cubits of length, and one cubit of broadness, and one cubit and an half in height.
EXO 25:24 And thou shalt overgild the board with most pure gold, and thou shalt make to it a golden brink about;
EXO 25:25 and thou shalt make to that brink a crown raised betwixt four fingers high, and thou shalt make on that another little golden crown.
EXO 25:26 And thou shalt make ready four golden rings, and thou shalt put them in [[the]] four corners of the same board, by all the feet thereof.
EXO 25:27 Under the crown shall be golden rings, that the bars be put through them, and so the table may be borne.
EXO 25:28 Thou shalt make the bars of the wood of shittim, and thou shalt com-pass them with gold to bear the board.
EXO 25:29 And thou shalt make ready vessels of vinegar, and vials, and censers, and cups of purest gold, in which flowing sacrifices shall be offered.
EXO 25:30 And thou shalt set on the board loaves of proposition, or of setting forth, in my sight ever[[more]].
EXO 25:31 And thou shalt make a candle-stick beaten out with an hammer, of cleanest gold, [[and]]thou shalt make the shaft thereof, and [[the]] rods, and cups, and little roundels [[or balls]], and lilies coming forth thereof.
EXO 25:32 Six rods shall go out of the sides of it, three of the one side, and three of the other.
EXO 25:33 Three cups as in the manner of a nut by each rod, and [[the]] little roundels [[or balls]] together, and a lily, and in like manner three cups at the likeness of a nut in the tother rod, and little roundels together, and a lily; this shall be the work of six rods, that shall be brought forth [[out]] of the candlestick shaft.
EXO 25:34 Forsooth in that candlestick shall be four cups in the manner of a nut, and little roundels [[or balls]] and lilies by each cup;
EXO 25:35 and the little roundels [[or balls]] shall be under two rods by three places, the which rods altogether be made six, coming forth of one shaft;
EXO 25:36 and therefore the little roundels and the rods thereof shall be all beaten out with an hammer, of cleanest gold.
EXO 25:37 And thou shalt make seven lanterns, and thou shalt set them on the candlestick, that they shine even against each other.
EXO 25:38 Also tongs to snuff the candles, and the vessels where those snuffs, that be snuffed out, be quenched, be made of cleanest gold.
EXO 25:39 All the weight of the candlestick with all his vessels shall have, or weigh, a talent of cleanest gold.
EXO 25:40 Behold thou, and make all things by the exemplar, which is showed to thee in the hill.
EXO 26:1 Forsooth the tabernacle shall be made thus; thou shalt make ten curtains of bis folded again, and of jacinth, and of purple, and of red silk twice-dyed, made diverse by embroidery work.
EXO 26:2 The length of one curtain shall have eight and twenty cubits, the breadth shall be of four cubits; all the curtains shall be made of one measure.
EXO 26:3 Five curtains shall be joined to themselves together, and other five shall cleave together by like bond.
EXO 26:4 Thou shalt make small rings, or eyelets, of jacinth in the sides, and in the heights of the curtains, that they may be coupled together.
EXO 26:5 One curtain shall have fifty eye-lets in ever either part, so set in, that one eyelet come against another eyelet, and that the one curtain may be shaped to the tother.
EXO 26:6 And thou shalt make fifty golden rings, by which the veils of [[the]] curtains shall be joined, that one tabernacle be made.
EXO 26:7 Also thou shalt make eleven says to cover the covering of the tabernacle;
EXO 26:8 the length of one say shall have thirty cubits, and the breadth shall have four cubits; even measure shall be of all the says.
EXO 26:9 Of which thou shalt join five by themselves, and thou shalt couple six to themselves together, so that thou double the sixth say in the front of the roof.
EXO 26:10 And thou shalt make fifty eyelets in the hem of [[the]] one say, that it may be joined to the tother; and fifty eyelets in the hem of the tother say, that it be coupled with the tother;
EXO 26:11 and thou shalt make fifty fastenings, or buckles, of brass, with which the small rings, or eyelets, of the curtains shall be joined together, and so one covering be made of all.
EXO 26:12 Soothly that that is left over in the says, that be made ready to the covering, that is, one say that is more, of the half thereof, thou shalt cover the hinder part of the tabernacle;
EXO 26:13 and a cubit shall hang on [[the]] one part, and the tother cubit on the tother part, which cubit is more in the length of [[the]] says, and it shall cover ever either side of the tabernacle.
EXO 26:14 And thou shalt make another covering to the roof, of skins of wethers made red, and over this thou shalt make again another covering of skins of jacinth.
EXO 26:15 Also thou shalt make [[the]] standing boards of the tabernacle, of the wood of shittim,
EXO 26:16 which boards shall have each by themselves ten cubits in length, and in breadth a cubit and an half.
EXO 26:17 Forsooth two indentings [[or rabbet-ings]] shall be in the sides of a board, by which one board shall be joined to another board; and in this manner all the boards shall be made ready.
EXO 26:18 Of which boards twenty shall be in the midday side, that goeth to the south;
EXO 26:19 to the which boards thou shalt set forty silveren bases, that two bases be set [[or put]] under each board, by two corners.
EXO 26:20 And in the second side of the tabernacle, that goeth to the north, shall be twenty boards,
EXO 26:21 having forty silveren bases; two bases shall be set [[or put]] under each board.
EXO 26:22 Soothly at the west coast of the tabernacle thou shalt make six boards;
EXO 26:23 and again thou shalt make twain [[or two]] other boards, that shall be raised, or set up, in the corners on the back half of the tabernacle;
EXO 26:24 and the boards shall be joined to themselves from beneath till to above, and one joining shall withhold [[or hold]] all the boards. And like joining shall be kept to the two boards, that shall be set [[or put]] in the corners,
EXO 26:25 and they shall be eight boards altogether; the silveren bases of them shall be sixteen, while two bases be reckoned by one board.
EXO 26:26 Thou shalt make also five bars of [[the]] wood of shittim, to hold together the boards in one side of the tabernacle,
EXO 26:27 and five other bars in the other side, and of the same number at the west coast;
EXO 26:28 the which bars shall be put through the middle of the boards from the one end till to the other.
EXO 26:29 And thou shalt overgild those boards, and thou shalt set golden rings in them, by the which rings, the bars shall hold together the work of the boards, the which bars thou shalt cover with golden plates.
EXO 26:30 And thou shalt raise up the tabernacle, by the exemplar that was showed to thee in the hill.
EXO 26:31 Thou shalt make also a veil of jacinth, and purple, and of red silk twice-dyed, and of bis folded again, by embroidery work, and woven together by fair diversity;
EXO 26:32 which veil thou shalt hang before four pillars of the wood of shittim; and soothly those pillars shall be overgilt; and they shall have golden hooks, but the bases shall be silver.
EXO 26:33 Forsooth the veil shall be set in by the rings, within which veil thou shalt set [[or put]] the ark of witnessing, whereby the saintuary, and the saintuary of saintuaries, shall be separated.
EXO 26:34 And thou shalt set [[or put]] the propitiatory, that is, a golden table covering the ark of God, on the ark of [[the]] witnessing, into the holy of holy things;
EXO 26:35 and thou shalt set a board without the veil, and against the board thou shalt set the candlestick in the south side of the tabernacle; for the board shall stand in the north side.
EXO 26:36 Thou shalt make also a curtain in the entering of the tabernacle, of jacinth, and purple, and of red silk twice-dyed, and of bis folded again, by embroidery work.
EXO 26:37 And thou shalt overgild five pillars of [[the]] wood of shittim, before which pillars the curtain shall be led, of which pillars the hooks shall be of gold, and the bases of brass.
EXO 27:1 Also thou shalt make an altar of the wood of shittim, which shall have five cubits in length, and so many in breadth, that is, square, and three cubits in height.
EXO 27:2 Forsooth horns shall be by [[the]] four corners thereof; and thou shalt cover it with brass.
EXO 27:3 And thou shalt make into the uses of the altar, pans to receive [[the]] ashes, and tongs, and fleshhooks, and firepans; thou shalt make all these vessels of brass.
EXO 27:4 And thou shalt make a brazen griddle in the manner of a net, and by the four corners thereof shall be four brazen rings,
EXO 27:5 which griddle thou shalt put under the firepan of the altar; and the griddle shall be till to the midst of the altar.
EXO 27:6 And thou shalt make the two bars of the altar, of the wood of shittim, the which bars thou shalt cover with plates of brass;
EXO 27:7 and thou shalt lead in the bars by the rings, and they shall be on ever either side of the altar, to bear.
EXO 27:8 Thou shalt make that altar not massive or solid, but void, and hollow within, as it was showed to thee in the hill.
EXO 27:9 Also thou shalt make a large porch of the tabernacle, in the manner of a churchyard, in whose midday coast against the south shall be curtains of bis folded again; one side shall hold an hundred cubits in length,
EXO 27:10 and twenty pillars, with so many brazen bases, which pillars shall have silver hooks, and the holdings of those.
EXO 27:11 In like manner in the north side, by the length, shall be curtains of an hundred cubits, twenty pillars, and brazen bases of the same number; and the hooks of the pillars, and the holdings of those, shall be of silver.
EXO 27:12 Forsooth in the breadth of the large porch, that beholdeth to the west, shall be curtains by fifty cubits, and ten pillars shall be, and as many bases.
EXO 27:13 In that breadth of the large porch, that beholdeth to the east, shall be fifty cubits,
EXO 27:14 in which the curtains of fifteen cubits shall be assigned to one side, and three pillars, and so many bases;
EXO 27:15 and in the other side shall be curtains holding fifteen cubits, and three pillars, and so many bases.
EXO 27:16 Forsooth in the large entry of the porch shall be made a curtain of twenty cubits, of jacinth, and purple, and of red silk twice-dyed, and of bis folded again, by embroidery work; it shall have four pillars, with so many bases.
EXO 27:17 All the pillars of the great porch by compass shall be clothed with plates of silver, with hooks of silver, and with bases of brass.
EXO 27:18 The great porch shall occupy an hundred cubits in length, fifty in breadth; the height of the curtains shall be of five cubits; and it shall be made of bis folded again; and it shall have brazen bases.
EXO 27:19 Thou shalt make of brass all the vessels of the tabernacle, into all uses and ceremonies, as well the stakes thereof, as of the great entry.
EXO 27:20 Command thou also to the sons of Israel, that they bring to thee the cleanest oil of olive trees, and pounded with a pestle, that a lantern burn ever[[more]]
EXO 27:21 in the tabernacle of witnessing without the veil, which is hanged in the tabernacle of witnessing; and Aaron and his sons shall set it, that it shine before the Lord from eventide till the morrowtide; it shall be everlasting worshipping by their successions, or after-comings, of the sons of Israel.
EXO 28:1 Also apply [[or present]] thou to thee, or bring to thy presence, Aaron, thy brother, with his sons, from the midst of the sons of Israel, that Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar, be set in priesthood to me.
EXO 28:2 And thou shalt make an holy cloth to Aaron, thy brother, into glory and fairness.
EXO 28:3 And thou shalt speak to all [[the]] wise men in heart, which I have filled with the spirit of prudence, that they make clothes to Aaron, in which he shall be hallowed, and shall minister to me.
EXO 28:4 Forsooth these shall be the clothes, which they shall make; they shall make a rational, that is, an ouch or brooch upon the breast, in which doom and truth, or Urim and Thum-mim shall be written, and a cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], a coat, and a strait linen cloth, a mitre, and a girdle; holy clothes to Aaron, thy brother, and to his sons, that they be set in priesthood to me.
EXO 28:5 And they shall take gold, and jacinth, and purple, and red silk twice-dyed, and bis;
EXO 28:6 forsooth they shall make the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]] of gold, and of jacinth, and of purple, and of red silk twice-dyed, and of bis folded again, by embroidery work [[or needle-work]] of diverse colours.
EXO 28:7 It shall have two hems joined to ever either side of [[the]] highness, that they go into one.
EXO 28:8 That weaving, and all [[the]] diversity of the work shall be of gold, and of jacinth, and of purple, and of red silk twice-dyed, and of bis folded again.
EXO 28:9 And thou shalt take two stones of onyx, and thou shalt engrave in them the names of the sons of Israel,
EXO 28:10 six names in one stone, and six others in the tother stone, by the order of their birth;
EXO 28:11 by the work of an engraver, and by the painting of a man that adorneth with gems, thou shalt engrave those stones with the names of the sons of Israel; and thou shalt enclose and encompass with gold.
EXO 28:12 And thou shalt set those stones in ever either side of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], as a memorial to the sons of Israel; and Aaron shall bear the names of them before the Lord on ever either shoulder, for remembering.
EXO 28:13 And thou shalt make hooks of gold,
EXO 28:14 and two little chains of cleanest gold, cleaving to themselves together, which little chains thou shalt set in the hooks.
EXO 28:15 Also thou shalt make the rational of doom by work of diverse colours, after the weaving of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], of gold, jacinth, and purple, of red silk twice-dyed, and of bis folded again.
EXO 28:16 It shall be four-cornered, and double; it shall have the measure of a palm of an hand, as well in the length, as in breadth.
EXO 28:17 And thou shalt set therein four orders of stones; in the first order shall be the stone sardius, topaz, and smaragdus;
EXO 28:18 in the second order shall be carbuncle, sapphire, and jasper;
EXO 28:19 in the third order shall be ligure, agate, and amethyst;
EXO 28:20 and in the fourth order shall be crystallite, onyx, and beryl; these [[or they]] shall be enclosed in gold, by their orders,
EXO 28:21 and shall have the names of the sons of Israel; these [[or they]] shall be engraved with twelve names; all the stones by themselves, with the names of all the sons by themselves, by [[the]] twelve lineages.
EXO 28:22 Thou shalt make in the rational chains cleaving to themselves together of purest gold,
EXO 28:23 and thou shalt make two golden rings, which thou shalt set in ever either highness of the rational.
EXO 28:24 And thou shalt join the golden chains with the rings that be in the margins thereof,
EXO 28:25 and thou shalt couple the ends of the chains to the two hooks in ever either side of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], that beholdeth the rational.
EXO 28:26 And thou shalt make two golden rings, which thou shalt set in the high-ness of the rational, and in the hems of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], that be even against, and behold the latter things thereof.
EXO 28:27 Also and thou shalt make twain [[or two]] other golden rings, that shall be set in ever either side of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]] beneath, that beholdeth against the face of the lower joining, that it may be set covenably with the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]].
EXO 28:28 And the rational be bound by his rings with the rings of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], with a lace of jacinth, that the joining made may craftily dwell, and that the rational and the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]] may not be separated each from other.
EXO 28:29 And Aaron shall bear the names of the sons of Israel in the rational of doom on his breast, when he entereth into the saintuary, a memorial before the Lord without end.
EXO 28:30 Forsooth thou shalt set in the rational of doom, teaching and truth or Urim and Thummim, which shall be in the breast of Aaron, when he entereth before the Lord; and he shall bear the doom of the sons of Israel in his breast in the sight of the Lord ever[[more]].
EXO 28:31 And thou shalt make the coat of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]] all of jacinth,
EXO 28:32 in whose middle above shall be an hood, that is, an hole for the head, and a woven hem by compass thereof, as it is wont to be done in the hems of clothes, lest it be broken lightly.
EXO 28:33 Forsooth beneath at the feet of the same coat, by compass, thou shalt make as pomegranates, of jacinth, and purple, and of red silk twice-dyed, and of bis folded again;
EXO 28:34 while small bells be meddled [[or mingled]] in the midst, so that a little gold bell be and a pomegranate, and again another little bell of gold and a pomegranate.
EXO 28:35 And Aaron shall be clothed with that coat, or alb, in the office of his service, that the sound be heard, when he entereth into the saintuary, and goeth out, in the sight of the Lord; and that he die not.
EXO 28:36 And thou shalt make a plate of purest gold, in which thou shalt engrave by the work of an engraver, The Holy to the Lord, that is, the name of the Lord, Tetragrammaton.
EXO 28:37 And thou shalt bind that plate with a lace of jacinth, and it shall be on the mitre, and it shall nigh [[to]] the forehead of the bishop.
EXO 28:38 And Aaron shall bear the wicked-nesses of those things that the sons of Israel shall offer, and hallow in all their gifts to God, and in their free gifts to men; and the plate shall ever[[more]] be in Aaron’s forehead, that the Lord be pleased to them.
EXO 28:39 And thou shalt bind the coat of bis, that is, the linen cloth, and the mitre of bis, and thou shalt make also a girdle, by embroidery work.
EXO 28:40 Forsooth thou shalt make ready to Aaron’s sons linen coats, that is, linen clothes, and girdles, and mitres, into glory and fairness.
EXO 28:41 And thou shalt clothe Aaron, thy brother, with all these things, and his sons with him. And thou shalt anoint them, and make sacred the hands of them all; and thou shalt hallow them, that they be set in priesthood to me.
EXO 28:42 Also thou shalt make to them linen breeches, that they cover the flesh of their filth[[hood]], from the reins unto their hips.
EXO 28:43 And Aaron and his sons shall use those breeches, when they shall enter into the tabernacle of witnessing, or when they nigh to the altar, that they minister in the saintuary, lest they be guilty of wickedness, and die; it shall be a lawful thing everlasting to Aaron, and to his seed after him.
EXO 29:1 But also thou shalt do this, that they be made sacred to me in priest-hood; take thou a calf of the drove, and two rams without wem,
EXO 29:2 and therf loaves, and a cake with-out sourdough, which be sprinkled altogether with oil, and therf pastes sodden in water, balmed, either fried, with oil; thou shalt make all these things of pure wheat flour,
EXO 29:3 and thou shalt offer them put in a basket. Forsooth thou shalt present the calf, and [[the]] two rams,
EXO 29:4 and Aaron and his sons, at the door of the tabernacle of witnessing; and when thou hast washed the father and his sons in water,
EXO 29:5 thou shalt clothe Aaron with his clothes, that is, the linen cloth, and coat, and the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], and the rational, which thou shalt bind with a girdle.
EXO 29:6 And thou shalt set the mitre on his head, and the holy plate on the mitre,
EXO 29:7 and thou shalt shed [[or pour]] the oil of anointing on his head; and by this custom he shall be made sacred.
EXO 29:8 Also thou shalt present his sons, and thou shalt clothe them with linen clothes,
EXO 29:9 and thou shalt gird Aaron and his sons with a girdle; and thou shalt set mitres on them; and they shall be my priests by everlasting religion. [[And]] After that thou hast hallowed their hands,
EXO 29:10 also thou shalt present the calf before the tabernacle of witnessing; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the calf’s head;
EXO 29:11 and thou shalt slay it in the sight of the Lord, beside the door of the tabernacle of witnessing.
EXO 29:12 And thou shalt take the blood of the calf, and thou shalt put it with thy finger upon the corners of the altar. Forsooth thou shalt shed [[or pour]] the other blood that is left beside the foundament or base of the altar.
EXO 29:13 And thou shalt take all the fatness that covereth the entrails, and the caul of the maw, and the two kidneys, and the fatness that is on them; and thou shalt offer them as incense upon the altar.
EXO 29:14 Forsooth thou shalt burn without-forth the tents the flesh of the calf, and the skin, and the dung, for it is slain for sin.
EXO 29:15 Also thou shalt take one ram, on whose head Aaron and his sons shall set hands;
EXO 29:16 and when thou hast slain that ram, thou shalt take of his blood, and shalt shed [[or pour]] it about the altar.
EXO 29:17 Forsooth thou shalt cut that ram into small gobbets, and thou shalt put his entrails washed, and his feet, upon his flesh carved, and upon his head;
EXO 29:18 and thou shalt offer thus all the ram into incense on the altar; it is an offering to the Lord, the sweetest odour of the slain sacrifice of the Lord.
EXO 29:19 And thou shalt take the tother ram, on whose head Aaron and his sons shall set their hands;
EXO 29:20 and when thou hast offered that ram, thou shalt take of his blood, and thou shalt put it upon the last part of the right ear of Aaron, and of his sons, and upon the thumbs of their right hand, and the big toes of their right foot; and thou shalt shed [[or pour]] the blood on the altar by compass.
EXO 29:21 And when thou hast taken of the blood, that is on the altar, and of the oil of anointing, thou shalt sprinkle Aaron and his clothes, [[and]] his sons and their clothes. And when they and their clothes be made sacred,
EXO 29:22 thou shalt take the inner fatness of the ram, and the tail, and the fatness that covereth the entrails, and the caul of the maw, and the two kidneys, and the fatness that is on them; and thou shalt take the right shoulder, for it is the ram of consecration;
EXO 29:23 and thou shalt take a tender cake of one loaf, sprinkled with oil, and the paste that is sodden in water, and after fried in oil, of the pannier of therf loaves, which is set in the sight of the Lord.
EXO 29:24 And thou shalt put all these things upon the hands of Aaron, and of his sons, and thou shalt hallow them, and raise them [[up]] before the Lord.
EXO 29:25 And thou shalt take all these things from their hands, and thou shalt burn them on the altar, into burnt sacrifice, [[the]] sweetest odour in the sight of the Lord, for it is the offering of the Lord.
EXO 29:26 Also thou shalt take the breast of the ram, by which Aaron was hallowed, and thou shalt hallow it, raised [[up]] before the Lord; and it shall turn into thy part.
EXO 29:27 And thou shalt hallow also the breast made sacred, and the shoulder which thou separatedest from the ram, by which Aaron was hallowed, and his sons;
EXO 29:28 and they shall turn into the part of Aaron, and of his sons, by everlasting right, of the sons of Israel; for they be the first things, and the beginning/s of the peaceable sacrifices of them, which they offer to the Lord.
EXO 29:29 Forsooth the sons of Aaron shall have after him the holy clothes, which Aaron shall use, that they be anointed therein, and that their hands be made sacred.
EXO 29:30 That of his sons, that shall be made bishop for him, shall use that cloth seven days, and which son shall enter into the tabernacle of witnessing, that he minister in the saintuary.
EXO 29:31 And soothly thou shalt take the wether of hallowing, that is, the ram of consecration, and thou shalt seethe his flesh in the holy place,
EXO 29:32 which flesh Aaron and his sons shall eat, and they shall eat the loaves, that be in the basket, in the porch of the tabernacle of witnessing,
EXO 29:33 that it be a pleasing sacrifice, and that the hands of the offerers be hallowed. An alien shall not eat of these things, for they be holy.
EXO 29:34 That if anything leaveth of the flesh hallowed, either of the loaves, till to the morrowtide, thou shalt burn the remnants with fire; they shall not be eaten, for they be hallowed.
EXO 29:35 Thou shalt do on Aaron, and on his sons, all things which I commanded to thee. Seven days thou shalt make sacred their hands,
EXO 29:36 and thou shalt offer a calf for sin by each day to cleanse; and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast offered the sacrifice of cleansing, and thou shalt anoint the altar into [[the]] hallowing of it.
EXO 29:37 Seven days thou shalt cleanse and hallow the altar, and it shall be the holy of holy things; each man that shall touch it shall be hallowed.
EXO 29:38 This it is, that thou shalt do in the altar; two lambs of one year continually by each day,
EXO 29:39 one lamb in the morrowtide, and the tother in the eventide;
EXO 29:40 thou shalt do in one lamb the tenth part of flour sprinkled with oil, pounded, that shall have a measure, the fourth part of hin, that is, of two pounds, and wine of the same measure, to make the flowing sacrifice.
EXO 29:41 Soothly thou shalt offer the tother lamb at eventide, by the custom of the offering of the morrowtide, and by those things, which we said, into the odour of sweetness;
EXO 29:42 it is a sacrifice to the Lord by everlasting offering into your gener-ations, at the door of the tabernacle of witnessing before the Lord, where I shall ordain that I speak to thee;
EXO 29:43 and there I shall command to the sons of Israel; and the altar shall be hallowed in my glory.
EXO 29:44 And I shall hallow also the tabernacle of witnessing with the altar, and Aaron and his sons, that they be set in priesthood to me.
EXO 29:45 And I shall dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel, and I shall be God to them;
EXO 29:46 and they shall know, that I am their Lord God, which led them out of the land of Egypt, that I should dwell among them; for I am their Lord God.
EXO 30:1 Also thou shalt make an altar of the wood of shittim, for to burn incense;
EXO 30:2 and the altar shall have a cubit of length, and another cubit of breadth, that is four-cornered, and two cubits in height; and the corners [[or horns]] shall come forth of the altar.
EXO 30:3 And thou shalt clothe it with cleanest gold, as well the roof thereof, that is, the higher part, as the walls, and [[the]] corners by compass thereof; and thou shalt make to the altar a little golden crown by compass,
EXO 30:4 and two golden circles under the crown by all sides, that bars be put into those rings, and so the altar be borne.
EXO 30:5 Also thou shalt make the bars of the wood of shittim, and thou shalt overgild them;
EXO 30:6 and thou shalt set the altar against the veil, that hangeth before the ark of witnessing, before the propitiatory, with which the witnessing is covered, where I shall speak to thee.
EXO 30:7 And Aaron shall burn thereon incense smelling sweetly early; when he shall array the lanterns, he shall burn it;
EXO 30:8 and when he setteth the lanterns at eventide, he shall burn everlasting incense before the Lord, into your generations.
EXO 30:9 Ye shall not offer thereon incense of other making, neither offering, nor slain sacrifice, neither ye shall offer flowing offerings thereon.
EXO 30:10 And Aaron shall pray on the horns thereof once by the year, in the blood which is offered for sin, and he shall please the Lord thereon in your generations; it shall be the holy of holy things to the Lord.
EXO 30:11 And the Lord spake to Moses, and said,
EXO 30:12 When thou shalt take the sum of the sons of Israel, all by themselves shall give by the number price for their souls to the Lord, and vengeance shall not be in them, when they be numbered.
EXO 30:13 Soothly each that passeth to the named, that is, of twenty years, shall give this price, half a shekel by the measure of the temple; a shekel hath twenty half-pence; the half part of a shekel shall be offered to the Lord.
EXO 30:14 He that is had in the number, from twenty years and above, shall give this price;
EXO 30:15 a rich man shall not add to the half of a shekel, and a poor man shall nothing abate.
EXO 30:16 And thou shalt betake into the uses of the tabernacle of witnessing the money taken, which is gathered of the sons of Israel, that it be a mind of them before the Lord, and he shall be merciful to their souls.
EXO 30:17 And the Lord spake to Moses, and said,
EXO 30:18 Also thou shalt make a great vessel of brass with his foundament to wash in, and thou shalt set it betwixt the tabernacle of witnessing and the altar; and when water is put therein,
EXO 30:19 Aaron and his sons shall wash therein their hands and their feet,
EXO 30:20 when they shall enter into the tabernacle of witnessing, and when they shall nigh to the altar, that they offer therein incense to the Lord, lest peradventure they die;
EXO 30:21 it shall be a lawful thing everlasting to him and to his seed by successions.
EXO 30:22 And the Lord spake to Moses, and said,
EXO 30:23 Take to thee sweet smelling spiceries, of the first and chosen myrrh, five hundred shekels; and of canel the half, that is, two hundred and fifty shekels; [[and]] in like manner of calamus, that is, a sweet smelling tree, small and full of knots, two hundred and fifty shekels;
EXO 30:24 also of cassia five hundred shekels, in the weight of [[the]] saintuary; the oil of olives trees, the measure of hin;
EXO 30:25 and thou shalt make the holy oil of anointing, an ointment made by the craft of an ointment maker.
EXO 30:26 And thou shalt anoint thereof the tabernacle of witnessing, and the ark of the testament,
EXO 30:27 and the board with his vessels, [[and]] the candlestick, and the appur-tenances thereof, the altars of incense,
EXO 30:28 and of burnt sacrifice, and all the appurtenance, that pertaineth to the adorning of those things.
EXO 30:29 And thou shalt hallow all things, and they shall be the holy of holy things; he that shall touch those [[or them]], shall be hallowed beforehand.
EXO 30:30 Thou shalt anoint Aaron, and his sons, and thou shalt hallow them, that they be set in priesthood to me.
EXO 30:31 And thou shalt say to the sons of Israel, This oil of anointing shall be holy to me into your generations.
EXO 30:32 The flesh of a man shall not be anointed thereof, and by the making thereof ye shall not make another such oil, for it is hallowed, and it shall be holy to you.
EXO 30:33 Whatever man maketh such oil, and giveth thereof to an alien, he shall be put out of his people.
EXO 30:34 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, Take to thee sweet smelling spiceries, stacte, and onycha, galbanum of good odour, and most pure frankincense, all these shall be of even weight.
EXO 30:35 And thou shalt make incense, made by the craft of an ointment maker, meddled [[or mingled]]together diligently, and pure, and most worthy of hallowing.
EXO 30:36 And when thou hast pounded all these things into smallest powder, thou shalt put thereof before the tabernacle of witnessing, in which place I shall appear to thee; the made incense shall be to you the holy of holy things.
EXO 30:37 Ye shall not make such a making into your [[own]] uses, for it is holy to the Lord.
EXO 30:38 Whatever man maketh like thing to it, that he use the odour thereof, he shall perish from his people.
EXO 31:1 And the Lord spake to Moses, saying,
EXO 31:2 Lo! I have called Bezaleel by name, the son of Uri, son of Hur, of the lineage of Judah;
EXO 31:3 and I have filled him with the spirit of God, with wisdom, and under-standing, and knowing in all work,
EXO 31:4 to find out, or cast, whatever thing may be made subtly of gold, and silver, and brass,
EXO 31:5 and marble, and gems, and of diversity of woods.
EXO 31:6 And I have given to him a fellow, Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the kindred of Dan; and I have put in their hearts the wisdom of each learned man, that they make all things which I have commanded to thee;
EXO 31:7 the tabernacle of [[the]] bond of peace, and the ark of witnessing, and the propitiatory, or the table, that is thereon, and all the vessels of the tabernacle;
EXO 31:8 also the board, and the vessels thereof, the cleanest candlestick with his vessels, and the altars of incense,
EXO 31:9 and of burnt sacrifice, and all the vessels of them; the great washing vessel with his foundament;
EXO 31:10 [[the]] holy clothes in service to Aaron the priest, and to his sons, that they be set in their office in holy things;
EXO 31:11 the oil of anointing, and the incense of sweet smelling spiceries in the saintuary; they shall make all these things that I have commanded to thee.
EXO 31:12 And the Lord spake to Moses, saying,
EXO 31:13 Speak thou to the sons of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, See ye that ye keep my sabbath, for it is a sign betwixt me and you in your generations; that ye know, that I am the Lord, which hallow[[eth]] you.
EXO 31:14 Keep ye my sabbath, for it is holy to you; he that defouleth it, shall die by death; the soul of him, that doeth work in the sabbath, shall perish from the midst of his people.
EXO 31:15 Six days ye shall do work; in the seventh day is sabbath, the holy rest to the Lord; each man that doeth work in this day shall die.
EXO 31:16 The sons of Israel keep [[the]] sabbath, and hallow it in their generations; it is a covenant everlasting
EXO 31:17 betwixt me and the sons of Israel, and it is a sign everlasting; for in six days God made heaven and earth, and in the seventh day he ceased of work.
EXO 31:18 And when he had [[ful]] filled to speak to Moses, the Lord gave to Moses, in the hill of Sinai, two stone tables of witnessing, written with the finger of God.
EXO 32:1 Forsooth the people saw, that Moses made tarrying to come down from the hill, and it was gathered together against Aaron, and said, Rise thou, and make gods to us, that shall go before us, for we wot not what is befallen to this man Moses, that led us out of the land of Egypt.
EXO 32:2 And Aaron said to them, Take ye the golden earrings from the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring ye them to me.
EXO 32:3 The people did those things, that he commanded, and brought the earrings to Aaron;
EXO 32:4 and when he had taken those, he formed them by work of melting, and he made of them a molten calf. And they said, Israel, these be thy gods, that led thee out of the land of Egypt.
EXO 32:5 And when Aaron had seen this thing, he builded an altar before the calf, and he cried by the voice of a crier, and said, Tomorrow is the solemnity of the Lord.
EXO 32:6 And they rose early, and offered burnt sacrifices, and peaceable sacri-fices; and the people sat to eat and to drink, and they rose up to play, or to scorn, for idolatry is scorning of God.
EXO 32:7 And the Lord spake to Moses, and said, Go thou, go down, thy people hath sinned, whom thou leddest out of the land of Egypt.
EXO 32:8 They have gone away soon from the way that thou showedest them, and they have made to them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and they have offered sacrifices to it, and said, Israel, these be thy gods, that led thee out of the land of Egypt.
EXO 32:9 And again the Lord said to Moses, I see [[well]], that this people is of hard noll;
EXO 32:10 suffer thou me, that my strong vengeance be wroth against them, and that I do away them; and I shall make thee into a great folk.
EXO 32:11 Forsooth Moses prayed the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why is thy vengeance wroth against thy people, whom thou hast led out of the land of Egypt in great strength, and in a strong hand?
EXO 32:12 I beseech, that [[the]] Egyptians say not, He led them out fellily or slyly, to slay in the hills, and to do them away from [[the]] earth; thine ire cease, and be thou quemeful on the wicked-ness of thy people.
EXO 32:13 Have thou mind of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, thy servants, to which thou hast sworn by thyself, and saidest, I shall multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and I shall give to your seed all the land of which I spake, and ye shall wield it ever[[more]].
EXO 32:14 And the Lord was pleased with Moses’ words, that he did not the evil which he spake against his people.
EXO 32:15 And Moses turned again from the hill, and bare in his hands two tables of witnessing, written in either side,
EXO 32:16 and made by the work of God; and the writing of God was engraved in the tables.
EXO 32:17 Forsooth Joshua heard the noise of the people crying [[out]], and he said to Moses, Yelling of fighting is heard in the tents.
EXO 32:18 To whom Moses answered, It is not a cry of men exciting to battle, neither the cry of men compelled to fleeing, but I hear the voices of singers.
EXO 32:19 And when Moses had nighed to the tents, he saw the calf, and dances; and he was wroth greatly, and he threw out of his hands the tables, and he brake them at the roots of the hill.
EXO 32:20 And he took the calf, which they had made, and he burnt it, and brake it till to powder, which he sprinkled into the water, and gave thereof drink to the sons of Israel.
EXO 32:21 And Moses said to Aaron, What did this people to thee, that thou hast brought in on them the greatest sin?
EXO 32:22 To whom he answered, My lord, be not thou wroth, for thou knowest this people, that it is inclined, either ready, to evil;
EXO 32:23 they said to me, Make thou gods to us, that shall go before us, for we wot not, what hath befallen to this Moses, that led us out of the land of Egypt.
EXO 32:24 To whom I said, Who of you hath gold? They took, and gave to me, and I casted it forth into the fire, and this calf went out.
EXO 32:25 Therefore Moses saw the people, that it was made bare; for Aaron had spoiled it for the shame of the filthhood of making of the idol, and he had made the people naked among enemies.
EXO 32:26 And Moses stood in the gate of the tents, and said, If any man is of the Lord, be he joined to me; and all the sons of Levi were gathered to him.
EXO 32:27 To which he said, The Lord God of Israel saith these things, A man put his sword upon his hip, go ye, and turn ye again from gate unto gate by the middle of the tents, and each man slay his brother, his friend, and [[his]] neighbour, which consented to this idolatry.
EXO 32:28 And the sons of Levi did by the word of Moses, and as three thousand of men felled down in that day.
EXO 32:29 And Moses said, Ye have hallowed your hands today to the Lord, each man in his son, and [[his]] brother, that blessing be given to you.
EXO 32:30 Soothly when the tother day was made, Moses spake to the people, Ye have sinned the most sin; I shall go up to the Lord, if in any manner I shall be able to beseech him for your felony.
EXO 32:31 And he turned again to the Lord, and said, Lord, I beseech thee, this people hath sinned a great sin, and they have made golden gods to them;
EXO 32:32 either forgive thou this guilt to them, either if thou doest not, do away me from thy book, which thou hast written.
EXO 32:33 To whom the Lord answered, I shall do away from my book him that sinneth against me;
EXO 32:34 forsooth go thou, and lead this people, whither I spake to thee; mine angel shall go before thee; forsooth in the day of vengeance I shall visit also this sin of them.
EXO 32:35 Therefore the Lord smote the people, for the guilt of the calf, which Aaron made.
EXO 33:1 And the Lord spake to Moses, and said, Go, and go up from this place, thou, and thy people, that thou hast led out of the land of Egypt, into the land, which I have sworn to Abraham, and to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, I shall give it to thy seed.
EXO 33:2 And I shall send thy before-goer, an angel, that I cast out Canaanite, and Amorite, and Hittite, and Perizzite, and Hivite, and Jebusite;
EXO 33:3 and that thou enter into the land flowing with milk and honey; for I will not go up with thee, for thou art a people of hard noll, lest per-adventure I lose thee in the way.
EXO 33:4 The people heard this worst word, and mourned, and none was clothed with his adorning, that is, precious clothes, by custom.
EXO 33:5 And the Lord said to Moses, Speak thou to the sons of Israel, Thou art a people of hard noll; at once I shall go up in the midst of thee, and I shall do away thee; right now put thou away thine adorning, that is, crowns which they made in receiving of the law, that I know, what I shall do to thee.
EXO 33:6 Therefore the sons of Israel putted away their adorning, from the hill of Horeb onwards.
EXO 33:7 And Moses took the tabernacle, and set it far without the tents, and he called the name thereof the tabernacle of [[the]] bond of peace. And all the people that had any question, went out to the tabernacle of the bond of peace, without the tents.
EXO 33:8 And when Moses went out to the tabernacle, all the people rose, and each man stood in the door of his tent, and they beheld after Moses, till he entered into the tent.
EXO 33:9 Soothly when he entered into the tabernacle of the bond of peace, a pillar of cloud came down, and stood at the door of the tabernacle; and the Lord spake with Moses,
EXO 33:10 while all men saw that the pillar of cloud stood at the door of the tabernacle; and they stood, and worshipped, at the doors of their tabernacles.
EXO 33:11 Forsooth the Lord spake to Moses face to face, that is openly, as a man is wont to speak with his friend; and when Moses turned again into his tabernacle, Joshua, his servant, the son of Nun, a young man, went not out of the tabernacle.
EXO 33:12 Forsooth Moses said to the Lord, Thou commandest, that I lead out this people, and thou hast not showed to me, whom thou shalt send with me, namely since thou saidest, I knew thee by name, and thou hast found grace before me.
EXO 33:13 Therefore if I have found grace in thy sight, show thy face to me, that I know thee, and find grace before thine eyes; behold thy people, and this folk.
EXO 33:14 And God said, My face shall go before thee, and I shall give rest to thee.
EXO 33:15 And Moses said, If thou thyself shalt not go before us, lead thou not us out of this place;
EXO 33:16 for in what thing may we know, I and thy people, that we have found grace in thy sight, if thou shalt not go with us, that we be glorified of all peoples that dwell on [[the]] earth?
EXO 33:17 Forsooth the Lord said to Moses, I shall do also this word, that thou hast spoken; for thou hast found grace before me, and I know thyself by name.
EXO 33:18 And Moses said, Lord, show thou thy glory to me.
EXO 33:19 God answered, I shall show all my goodness to thee, and I shall call in the name of the Lord before thee, and I shall do mercy to whom I will, and I shall be merciful, either goodly, on whom it pleaseth me.
EXO 33:20 And again God said, Thou mayest not see my face, for a man shall not see me, and live.
EXO 33:21 And again God said, A place is with me, and thou shalt stand upon a stone;
EXO 33:22 and when my glory shall pass by, I shall set [[or put]] thee in the hole of the stone, and I shall cover thee with my right hand, till that I pass by;
EXO 33:23 and I shall take away mine hand, and thou shalt see mine hinder parts, forsooth thou mayest not see my face.
EXO 34:1 And afterward God said, Hew to thee two tables of stone at the like-ness of the former, and I shall write on those tables those words, which the tables, that thou brakest, had.
EXO 34:2 Be thou ready in the morrowtide, that thou go up anon into the hill of Sinai; and thou shalt stand with me on the top of the hill;
EXO 34:3 no man go up with thee, neither any man be seen by all the hill; and oxen and sheep be not fed against the hill.
EXO 34:4 Therefore Moses hewed two tables of stone, which manner the tables were before, and he rose by night, and went up into the hill of Sinai, as the Lord commanded to him; and he bare with him the tables.
EXO 34:5 And when the Lord had come down by a cloud, Moses stood with him, and called inwardly the name of the Lord;
EXO 34:6 and when the Lord passed before him, he said, Lordshipper, Lord God, merciful, and pious, patient, and of much mercy doing, and soothfast,
EXO 34:7 which keepest covenant and mercy into thousands, which doest away wickedness, and trespasses, and sins, and no man by himself is innocent with thee, which yieldest the wicked-ness of fathers to their sons, and to the sons of their sons, into the third and the fourth generation.
EXO 34:8 And hastily Moses was bowed low to [[the]] earth, and worshipped,
EXO 34:9 and said, Lord, if I have found grace in thy sight, I beseech thee, that thou go with us, for the people is of hard noll; and that thou do away our wickednesses and sins, and wield us.
EXO 34:10 The Lord answered, I shall make covenant, and in sight of all men I shall make signs, that were never seen on [[the]] earth, neither in any folks, that this people, in whose midst thou art, see the fearedful work of the Lord, that I shall make.
EXO 34:11 Keep thou all things, which I command to thee today; I myself shall cast out before thy face Amorites, and Canaanites, and Hittites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites.
EXO 34:12 Beware, lest any time thou join friendships with the dwellers of that land, which friendships be into falling to thee.
EXO 34:13 But also destroy thou their altars, break the images, and cut thou down their [[maumet]] woods;
EXO 34:14 do not thou worship an alien God; a jealous lover is the Lord’s name, God is a fervent lover;
EXO 34:15 make thou not covenant with the men of those countries, lest when they have done fornication, that is, idolatry, with their gods, and have worshipped the simulacra of them, any man call thee, that thou eat of the things offered to an idol.
EXO 34:16 Neither thou shalt take a wife of their daughters to thy sons, lest after those daughters have done fornication, that is, idolatry, they make also thy sons to do fornication into their gods.
EXO 34:17 Thou shalt not make to thee molten gods.
EXO 34:18 Thou shalt keep the solemnity of therf loaves; seven days thou shalt eat therf loaves, as I commanded to thee, in the time of the month of new fruits; for in the month of ver or spring time thou wentest out of Egypt.
EXO 34:19 All thing of male kind that open-eth the womb shall be mine, of all living beasts, as well of oxen, as of sheep, it shall be mine.
EXO 34:20 Thou shalt again-buy with a sheep the first engendered of an ass, else if thou givest not [[the]] price therefore, it shall be slain. Thou shalt again-buy the first begotten of thy sons; neither thou shalt appear void in my sight.
EXO 34:21 Six days thou shalt work, in the seventh day thou shalt cease to ear and to reap.
EXO 34:22 Thou shalt make to thee the solemnity of weeks, in the first things of fruits of thy ripe corn of wheat, and the solemnity when all things be gathered into barns, when the time of the year cometh again.
EXO 34:23 Each male kind of thee shall appear in three times of the year in the sight of the Lord Almighty, thy God of Israel.
EXO 34:24 For when I shall take away folks from thy face, and I shall alarge thy terms, none shall set treasons to thy land, while thou goest up, and appearest in the sight of thy Lord God, thrice in the year.
EXO 34:25 Thou shalt not offer on sour-dough the blood of my sacrifice, neither anything of the slain sacrifice of the solemnity of pask shall abide unto the morrowtide.
EXO 34:26 Thou shalt offer in the house of thy Lord God the first of the fruits of thy land. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in the milk of his mother.
EXO 34:27 And the Lord said to Moses, Write thou these words, by which I smote a bond of peace, both with thee and with Israel.
EXO 34:28 Therefore Moses was there with the Lord by forty days and forty nights, and he ate not bread, and drank not water; and he wrote in [[the]] tables the ten words of the bond of peace.
EXO 34:29 And when Moses came down from the hill of Sinai, he held in his hands two tables of witnessing, and he wist not that his face was horned with wonderful shining beams, of the fellowship of God’s word.
EXO 34:30 Forsooth Aaron and the sons of Israel saw Moses’ face horned, and they dreaded to nigh [[or come]] nigh,
EXO 34:31 and they were called of him, and they turned again, as well Aaron as the princes of the synagogue; and after that Moses spake,
EXO 34:32 they came to him, yea all the sons of Israel; to which he commanded all things, which he had heard of the Lord in the hill of Sinai.
EXO 34:33 And when the words were fulfilled, he put a veil on his face;
EXO 34:34 and he entered to the Lord, and spake with him, and he did away that veil, till he went out; and then he spake to the sons of Israel all things that were commanded to him;
EXO 34:35 which saw that the face of Moses going out was horned, but again he covered his face, if any time he spake to them.
EXO 35:1 Therefore when all the company of the sons of Israel was gathered, Moses said to them, These things it be, which the Lord commanded to be done.
EXO 35:2 Six days ye shall do work, the seventh day shall be holy to you, the sabbath and the rest of the Lord; he that doeth work in the sabbath shall be slain.
EXO 35:3 Ye shall not kindle fire in all your dwelling places by the sabbath day.
EXO 35:4 And Moses said to all the company of the sons of Israel, This is the word which the Lord commanded, and said,
EXO 35:5 Separate ye at you the first fruits to the Lord; each willful man and of ready will offer them to the Lord, gold, and silver, and brass,
EXO 35:6 and jacinth, and purple, and red silk twice-dyed, and bis, and hairs of goats,
EXO 35:7 and skins of rams made red, and skins of jacinth, and [[the]] wood of shittim,
EXO 35:8 and oil to the lights to be ordained, and spices so that the ointment be made, and the incense most sweet,
EXO 35:9 stones of onyx, and gems, to the adorning of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], and of the rational.
EXO 35:10 Whoever of you is wise, come he, and make that, that the Lord commanded,
EXO 35:11 that is, the tabernacle, and the roof thereof, and the covering; rings, and the buildings of boards, with [[the]] bars, stakes, and foundaments;
EXO 35:12 the ark, and bars; the propitiatory, and the veil, which is hanged before it;
EXO 35:13 the board, with bars, and vessels, and with [[the]] loaves of setting forth;
EXO 35:14 the candlestick to sustain [[the]] lights, the vessels, and lanterns thereof, and oil to the nourishing of fires;
EXO 35:15 the altar of incense, and the bars; the oil of anointing, and [[the]] incense of sweet smelling spiceries [[or spices]]; the curtain at the door of the tabernacle;
EXO 35:16 the altar of burnt sacrifice, and his brazen griddle, with his bars, and vessels; the great washing vessel, and his foundament;
EXO 35:17 the curtains of the large entry, with the pillars, and their bases; the curtain in the doors of the porch;
EXO 35:18 the stakes of the tabernacle, and of the large entry, with their cords;
EXO 35:19 the clothes, whose use is in the service of the saintuary; the clothes of Aaron the bishop, and of his sons, that they be set in priesthood to me.
EXO 35:20 And all the multitude of the sons of Israel went out of the sight of Moses,
EXO 35:21 and offered with most ready soul and devout the first things to the Lord, to make the work of the tabernacle of witnessing, whatever was needful to the adorning, and to the holy clothes.
EXO 35:22 Men and women gave bies of the arms, and earrings, and other rings, and ornaments of their arms nigh the hand; each golden vessel was separated into the gifts of the Lord.
EXO 35:23 If any man had jacinth, and purple, and red silk twice-dyed, bis, and the hairs of goats, skins of rams made red, and skins of jacinth, either blue,
EXO 35:24 metals of silver, and of brass, they offered to the Lord, and [[the]] wood of shittim into diverse uses.
EXO 35:25 But also women taught gave those things, which they had spun, jacinth, and purple, and vermilion, and bis,
EXO 35:26 and the hairs of goats; and they gave all things by their own free will.
EXO 35:27 Forsooth princes offered stones of onyx, and gems, to the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], and to the rational,
EXO 35:28 and sweet smelling spiceries [[or spices]], and oil to the lights to be ordained, and to make ready the ointment, and to make the incense of the sweetest odour.
EXO 35:29 All men and women offered gifts with devout souls, that the works should be made, which the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses; all the sons of Israel hallowed will-fully things to the Lord.
EXO 35:30 And Moses said to the sons of Israel, Lo! the Lord hath called Bezaleel by name, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the lineage of Judah;
EXO 35:31 and the Lord hath filled him with the spirit of God, of wisdom, and of understanding, and of knowing, and with all doctrine,
EXO 35:32 to find out and to make work in gold, and silver, and brass,
EXO 35:33 and in stones to be engraved, and in work of carpentry; whatever thing may be found craftily,
EXO 35:34 the Lord hath given in his heart; and the Lord hath called Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the lineage of Dan;
EXO 35:35 the Lord [[hath]] taught both with wisdom, that they make the works of a carpenter, of a stainer, and of an embroiderer, of jacinth, and of purple, and of red silk twice-dyed, and of bis, and that they make all things, and find all new things.
EXO 36:1 Therefore Bezaleel, and Aholiab, and each wise man, to whom the Lord gave wisdom and understanding, that they know how to work craftily, made things that were needful into the uses of the saintuary, and which the Lord commanded to be made.
EXO 36:2 And when Moses had called them, and each learned man, to whom the Lord had given wisdom and knowing, and the which proffered themselves by their own free will to make the work,
EXO 36:3 Moses betook to them all the gifts of the sons of Israel. And when they were busy in their work each day, the people offered their avows early.
EXO 36:4 Wherefore the workmen were compelled to come,
EXO 36:5 and they said to Moses, The people offereth more than is needful.
EXO 36:6 Therefore Moses commanded to be cried by the voice of a crier, Neither man nor woman offer more anything in the work of [[the]] saintuary; and so it was ceased from gifts to be offered,
EXO 36:7 for the things offered sufficed, and were over-abundant.
EXO 36:8 And all the wise men in heart, to fulfill the work of the tabernacle, made ten curtains of bis folded again, and of jacinth, and purple, and of red silk twice-dyed, by diverse work, and by craft of many colours.
EXO 36:9 Of which curtains one had in length eight and twenty cubits, and four cubits in breadth; one measure was of all the curtains.
EXO 36:10 And he joined five curtains one to another, and he coupled other five to themselves together;
EXO 36:11 and he made eyelets of jacinth in the hem of the one curtain on ever either side, and in like manner in the hem of the tother curtain,
EXO 36:12 that the eyelets shall come together against themselves, and they shall be joined together;
EXO 36:13 wherefore he melted out also fifty golden rings, that shall hold the eyelets of the curtains; and so one tabernacle was made.
EXO 36:14 He made also eleven says of the hairs of goats, to cover the roof of the tabernacle;
EXO 36:15 one say had thirty cubits in length, [[and]] four cubits in breadth; all the says were of one measure;
EXO 36:16 of which says he joined five by themselves, and six others by them-selves.
EXO 36:17 And he made fifty eyelets in the hem of one say, and fifty in the hem of the tother say, that those [[or they]] should be joined to themselves together;
EXO 36:18 and he made fifty buckles of brass by which the roof was fastened together, that one covering were made of all the says.
EXO 36:19 He made also a covering of the tabernacle of the skins of rams made red, and another veil above, of the skins of jacinth.
EXO 36:20 He made also [[the]] standing boards of the tabernacle, of the wood of shittim;
EXO 36:21 the length of one board was of ten cubits, and the breadth held one cubit and an half.
EXO 36:22 Two indentings [[or rabbetings]] were by each board, that the one should be joined to the tother; so he made in all the boards of the taber-nacle.
EXO 36:23 Of which boards twenty were at the midday coast against the south,
EXO 36:24 with forty bases of silver; two bases were set under one board on ever either side of the corners, where the indentings [[or rabbetings]] of the sides were ended in the corners.
EXO 36:25 And at the coast of the tabernacle that beholdeth to the north, he made twenty boards,
EXO 36:26 with forty bases of silver, two bases by each board.
EXO 36:27 Forsooth against the west, he made six boards,
EXO 36:28 and twain [[or two]] other boards by each corner of the tabernacle behind,
EXO 36:29 which were joined from beneath till to above, and were borne into one joining altogether; so he made on ever either part by the corners,
EXO 36:30 that they were eight boards altogether, and they had sixteen bases of silver, that is, two bases under each board.
EXO 36:31 He made also bars of the wood of shittim, five bars to hold together the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
EXO 36:32 and five other bars to shape together the boards of the tother side; and without these, he made five other bars for the boards at the west coast of the tabernacle against the sea.
EXO 36:33 He made also another bar, that should come by the middle boards, from corner till to corner.
EXO 36:34 Forsooth he overgilded the walls made of the boards, and he melted out their silveren bases, and he made their golden rings, by which the bars might be brought in, and he covered those same bars with golden plates.
EXO 36:35 He made also a veil diverse and parted, of jacinth, and purple, and red silk twice-dyed, and bis folded again, by the work of embroidery.
EXO 36:36 He made also four pillars of wood of shittim, which pillars with the hooks he overgilded, and he melted out their silveren bases.
EXO 36:37 He made also in the entering of the tabernacle a curtain of jacinth, and purple, and red silk twice-dyed, and bis folded again, by the work of embroidery.
EXO 36:38 And he made five pillars with their hooks, which he covered with gold; and he melted out their brazen bases, and their holdings, which he covered with gold.
EXO 37:1 Forsooth Bezaleel made also an ark of the wood of shittim, having two cubits and an half in length, and a cubit and an half in breadth; forsooth the height was of one cubit and an half;
EXO 37:2 and he covered the ark with purest gold, within and withoutforth. And he made to it a golden crown by compass,
EXO 37:3 and he melted out four golden rings, to be set by the four corners thereof, two rings in one side, and two rings in the other side.
EXO 37:4 And he made bars of the wood of shittim, or acacia wood, the which he covered with gold,
EXO 37:5 and which bars he put into the rings that were in the sides of the ark, to bear it.
EXO 37:6 He made also a propitiatory, that is, God’s answering place, of purest gold, of two cubits and an half in length, and one cubit and an half in breadth.
EXO 37:7 Also he made two cherubims [[or cherubim]] of gold, beaten out with an hammer, which he set on ever either side of the propitiatory,
EXO 37:8 one cherub in the height of the one part, and the tother cherub in the height of the tother part; two cherubims [[or cherubim]], one in each highness of the propitiatory,
EXO 37:9 stretching out the wings, and covering the propitiatory, and beholding themselves together, and that propitiatory.
EXO 37:10 He made also a board of the wood of shittim, in the length of two cubits, and in the breadth of one cubit, which board had a cubit and an half in height.
EXO 37:11 And he compassed the table with cleanest gold, and made to it a golden brink by compass;
EXO 37:12 and he made to that brink a golden crown, raised betwixt of four fingers; and on the same crown he made another golden crown.
EXO 37:13 Also he melted out four golden rings, which he put into the four corners, by all the feet of the table against the crown,
EXO 37:14 and he put bars into the circles, or rings, that the table might be borne.
EXO 37:15 And he made the bars of the wood of shittim, and compassed those [[or them]] with gold.
EXO 37:16 And he made[[the]] vessels to diverse uses of the board, vessels of vinegar, vials, and little cups, and censers of pure gold, in which the flowing sacrifices shall be offered.
EXO 37:17 And he made a candlestick, beaten out with an hammer, of cleanest gold, of whose stock, rods, cups, and little roundels [[or balls]], and lilies came forth;
EXO 37:18 six in ever either side, three rods on one side, and three on the other side;
EXO 37:19 three cups in the manner of a nut by each rod, and little roundels [[or balls]] together, and lilies; and three cups at the likeness of a nut in the tother rod, and little roundels together, and lilies; forsooth the work of six shafts that came forth of the stock of the candlestick, was even.
EXO 37:20 Soothly in that stock were four cups, in the manner of a nut, and little roundels [[or balls]] and lilies were by all the cups;
EXO 37:21 and [[the]] little roundels were under the two shafts by three places, which altogether be made six shafts coming forth of one stock;
EXO 37:22 therefore the little roundels [[or balls]], and the shafts thereof, were all beaten out with hammer, of purest gold.
EXO 37:23 He made also seven lanterns, with their snuffing tongs, and the vessels where the snuffs be quenched, of cleanest gold.
EXO 37:24 The candlestick with all his vessels weighed a talent of gold.
EXO 37:25 He made also the altar of incense, of the wood of shittim, having a cubit by square, that is, on each side one cubit, and two cubits in height, of whose corners came forth horns.
EXO 37:26 And he covered it with cleanest gold, and the griddle, and walls, and the horns; and he made to it a little golden crown by compass,
EXO 37:27 and two golden rings under the crown, by each side, that [[the]] bars be put into those [[or them]], and the altar may be borne.
EXO 37:28 Forsooth he made those bars of the wood of shittim, or acacia wood, and covered them with golden plates.
EXO 37:29 He made also oil to the ointment of hallowing, and [[the]] incense of sweet smelling spiceries [[or spices]], most clean, by the work of apothecary.
EXO 38:1 He made also the altar of burnt sacrifice of the wood of shittim, of five cubits by square, and of three cubits in height;
EXO 38:2 whose horns came forth [[out]] of the corners, and he covered it with plates of brass.
EXO 38:3 And into the uses thereof he made ready of brass diverse vessels, caul-drons, tongs, fleshhooks, hooks, and firepans.
EXO 38:4 He made also the brazen griddle thereof, in manner of a net, and a firepan under it, in the midst of the altar.
EXO 38:5 And he melted out four rings, by so many ends of the griddle, to put in the bars [[for]] to bear it;
EXO 38:6 and he made those same bars of the wood of shittim, and covered them with plates of brass.
EXO 38:7 And he led them into the rings that stood forth in the sides of the altar. Forsooth that altar was not massive or solid, but hollow of the building of the boards, and void within.
EXO 38:8 He made also a great washing vessel of brass, with his foundament, of the mirrors of brass of the women that watched in the great street of the tabernacle.
EXO 38:9 And he made the great porch, or great entry, in whose south coast were [[the]] curtains of bis folded again, of an hundred cubits,
EXO 38:10 twenty brazen pillars with their bases; the hooks of [[the]] pillars, and the holdings of those, were of silver;
EXO 38:11 evenly at the north coast, the curtains, pillars, and bases, and the hooks of pillars, and the holdings of those, were of the same measure, and work, and metal.
EXO 38:12 Forsooth in that coast that be-holdeth [[to]] the west were curtains of fifty cubits, ten brazen pillars with their bases; and the hooks of pillars, and the holdings of those, were of silver.
EXO 38:13 Soothly against the east he made ready curtains of fifty cubits,
EXO 38:14 of which curtains one side had fifteen cubits, of three pillars with their bases;
EXO 38:15 and in the other side, for he made the entering of the tabernacle betwixt ever either, were curtains evenly of fifteen cubits, three pillars, and so many bases.
EXO 38:16 Bis folded again covered all the curtains of the great entry.
EXO 38:17 The bases of the pillars were of brass; forsooth the hooks of those pillars, and the holdings of those, were of silver; but also he covered with silver the heads of the pillars of the great entry.
EXO 38:18 And in the entering thereof he made a curtain, by embroidery work, of jacinth, purple, vermilion, either red cloth, and of bis folded again, which curtain had twenty cubits in length, and the height was of five cubits, by the measure which all the curtains of the great entry had.
EXO 38:19 Forsooth the pillars in the entering were four, with brazen bases, and the hooks of pillars, and the holdings of those, were of silver;
EXO 38:20 and he made [[the]] brazen stakes of the tabernacle, and of the great entry, by compass.
EXO 38:21 These be the numbers of the amounts of metals of the tabernacle of witnessing, that be numbered, by the commandment of Moses, in the ceremonies, that is, services, of Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, the son of Aaron, [[the]] priest.
EXO 38:22 Which instruments Bezaleel, the son of Uri, [[the]] son of Hur, of the lineage of Judah, fulfilled; for the Lord commanded by Moses,
EXO 38:23 while Aholiab, the son of Ahisa-mach, of the lineage of Dan, was joined fellow to him, and he himself was a noble craftsman of wood, and a tapicer, that is, a weaver of diverse colours, and an embroiderer of jacinth, purple, vermilion, and bis.
EXO 38:24 All the gold that was spended in the work of the saintuary, and that was offered in gifts, was of nine and twenty talents, and of seven hundred and thirty shekels, at the measure of the saintuary.
EXO 38:25 Forsooth the silver of numbering of the people was an hundred hundreds, and a thousand and seven hundred and seventy and five shekels, at the weight of saintuary,
EXO 38:26 half a shekel by each head of all that passed to be numbered, from twenty years and above, of six hundred thousand and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty men.
EXO 38:27 Furthermore there were an hundred talents of silver, of which the bases of the saintuary were melted out alto-gether, and the bases of the entering, where the veil hangeth; an hundred bases were made of an hundred talents, for to each base was ordained a talent.
EXO 38:28 Forsooth of a thousand seven hundred and seventy and five shekels, he made the hooks of [[the]] pillars, and covered the heads of the pillars with silver.
EXO 38:29 Also of brass were offered two and seventy thousand talents, and four hundred shekels over.
EXO 38:30 Of which the bases in the entering of the tabernacle of witnessing were melted out, and the brazen altar, with his griddle, and all the vessels that pertain to the use thereof,
EXO 38:31 and the bases of the great entry, as well in the compass, as in the entering thereof, and the stakes of the tabernacle, and of the great entry by compass.
EXO 39:1 Forsooth of jacinth, and purple, vermilion, and bis, he made [[the]] clothes in which Aaron was clothed, when he ministered in [[the]] holy things, as the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 39:2 Therefore he made the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]] of gold, jacinth, and purple, and of red silk twice-dyed, and of bis folded again, by work of embroidery;
EXO 39:3 also he cut thin golden plates, and made thin into threads, that those [[or they]] may be folded again, with the warp of the former colours;
EXO 39:4 and he made twain [[or two]] hems coupled to themselves together, in ever either side of the ends;
EXO 39:5 and he made a girdle of the same colours, as the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 39:6 And he made ready two onyx stones, bound and enclosed in gold, and engraved by the craft of a worker in gems with the names of the sons of Israel;
EXO 39:7 six names in one stone, and six in the tother stone, by the order of their birth. And he set those stones in the sides of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], into a memorial of the sons of Israel, as the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 39:8 He made also the rational, by work of embroidery, by the work of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], of gold, jacinth, purple, and red silk twice-dyed, and of bis folded again;
EXO 39:9 he made the rational four-cornered, double, of the measure of four fingers.
EXO 39:10 And he set therein four orders of gems; in the first order was sardius, topaz, smaragdus;
EXO 39:11 in the second order was car-buncle, sapphire, jasper;
EXO 39:12 in the third order was ligure, agate, amethyst;
EXO 39:13 in the fourth order was crystallite, onyx, and beryl; compassed and enclosed with gold, by their orders.
EXO 39:14 And those twelve stones were engraved with [[the]] twelve names of the lineages of Israel, all the stones by themselves, by the names of all the lineages by themselves.
EXO 39:15 They made also in the rational, little chains, cleaving to themselves together, of purest gold,
EXO 39:16 and twain [[or two]] hooks, and so many rings of gold.
EXO 39:17 Forsooth they setted the rings on ever either side of the rational,
EXO 39:18 on which rings [[the]] two golden chains hanged, which they setted in the hooks, that stood forth in the corners of the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]].
EXO 39:19 These accorded so to themselves, both before and behind, that the cloth on the shoulders [[or cape]], and the rational,
EXO 39:20 were knitted together, and fastened to the girdle,
EXO 39:21 and coupled full strongly with the rings, which rings a lace of jacinth joined together, lest they were loosened, and slackened, and were moved each from other; as the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 39:22 They made also a coat on the shoulders, or alb, all of jacinth;
EXO 39:23 and the hood, or the amice, in the higher part, about the midst, and a woven hem, by the compass of the hood;
EXO 39:24 forsooth beneath at the feet they made pineapples of jacinth, and purple, and vermilion, and bis folded again;
EXO 39:25 and they made little bells of purest gold, which they setted betwixt the pomegranates, in the hem of the alb, by compass;
EXO 39:26 a golden little bell, and a pine-apple; with which the bishop went adorned, when he was set in service, as the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 39:27 They made also coats of bis, that is, linen clothes, by woven work, to Aaron and to his sons,
EXO 39:28 and mitres with small crowns of bis, and linen clothes of bis;
EXO 39:29 forsooth they made a girdle of bis folded again, of jacinth, purple, and vermilion, parted by craft of embroidery, as the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 39:30 They made also a plate of holy worshipping, of purest gold, and they wrote therein by the craft of an engraver in gems, The Holy of the Lord.
EXO 39:31 And they bound it with the mitre by a lace of jacinth, as the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 39:32 Therefore all the work of the tabernacle, and the covering of the witnessing, was performed; and the sons of Israel did all things which the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 39:33 And they offered the tabernacle, and the roof, and all the appurtenances, rings, boards, bars, and pillars, and the bases;
EXO 39:34 the covering of skins of rams made red, and another covering of skins of jacinth; the veil,
EXO 39:35 the ark, the bars, and the propitiatory;
EXO 39:36 the board with vessels, and with the loaves of setting forth;
EXO 39:37 the candlestick, lanterns, and the appurtenances of those, with [[the]] oil;
EXO 39:38 the golden altar, and the ointment, and [[the]] incense of sweet smelling spiceries [[or spices]]; and the curtain in the entering of the tabernacle;
EXO 39:39 the brazen altar, [[the]] griddle, bars, and all the vessels thereof; the great washing vessel, with his found-ament;
EXO 39:40 the curtains of the great entry, and the pillars with their bases; the curtain in the entering of the great porch, and the cords, and the stakes thereof. Nothing of the vessels failed, that was commanded to be made into [[the]] service of the tabernacle, and into the roof of the bond of peace.
EXO 39:41 Also the sons of Israel offered the clothes which the priests, that is, Aaron and his sons, use in the saintuary,
EXO 39:42 as the Lord commanded.
EXO 39:43 And after that Moses saw all those things fulfilled, he blessed them.
EXO 40:1 And the Lord spake to Moses, saying,
EXO 40:2 In the first month, in the first day of the month, thou shalt raise the tabernacle of witnessing.
EXO 40:3 And thou shalt set the ark therein, and thou shalt leave a veil before it.
EXO 40:4 And when the board is borne in, thou shalt set thereon those things that be commanded justly, either by the law. The candlestick shall stand with his lanterns,
EXO 40:5 and the golden altar, wherein the incense is burnt before the ark of witnessing. Thou shalt set a curtain in the entering of the tabernacle;
EXO 40:6 and before it thou shalt set the altar of burnt sacrifice,
EXO 40:7 thou shalt set the washing vessel betwixt the altar and the tabernacle, which washing vessel thou shalt fill with water.
EXO 40:8 And thou shalt encompass the great porch, and the entering thereof, with curtains.
EXO 40:9 And when thou hast taken the oil of anointing, thou shalt anoint the tabernacle, with his vessels, that those [[or they]] be hallowed;
EXO 40:10 the altar of burnt sacrifice, and all the vessels thereof;
EXO 40:11 the washing vessel, with his foundament or base. Thou shalt anoint all things with the oil of anointing, that they be holy of holy things.
EXO 40:12 And thou shalt present Aaron and his sons to the door of the tabernacle of witnessing; and, when they be washed with water,
EXO 40:13 thou shalt clothe them in holy clothes, that they minister to me,
EXO 40:14 (See verse 13 above.)
EXO 40:15 and that the anointing of them profit into everlasting priesthood.
EXO 40:16 And Moses did all things that the Lord commanded.
EXO 40:17 Therefore in the first month of the second year, in the first day of the month, the tabernacle was set.
EXO 40:18 And Moses areared it, and he set the boards, and bases, and bars, and he ordained [[the]] pillars;
EXO 40:19 and he stretched out the roof upon the tabernacle, and he put a covering above, as the Lord commanded.
EXO 40:20 He put also the witnessing, that is, the tables of the law, in the ark, and he set the bars within, and God’s answering place above.
EXO 40:21 And when he had brought the ark into the tabernacle, he hanged a veil before it, that he should fulfill the commandment of the Lord.
EXO 40:22 He setted [[or put]] also the board in the tabernacle of witnessing, at the north coast, without the veil,
EXO 40:23 and he ordained the loaves of setting forth before, as the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 40:24 He set [[or put]] also the candlestick in the tabernacle of witnessing, even against the board, in the south side,
EXO 40:25 and he set the lanterns by order, by the commandment of the Lord.
EXO 40:26 He put also the golden altar under the roof of witnessing, that is, of the tabernacle, against the veil,
EXO 40:27 and he burnt thereon incense of sweet smelling spiceries [[or spices]], as the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 40:28 He set [[or put]] also a curtain in the entering of the tabernacle,
EXO 40:29 and the altar of burnt sacrifice in the porch of the witnessing, and he offered there burnt sacrifice, and sacrifices, as the Lord commanded.
EXO 40:30 Also he ordained the washing vessel, betwixt the tabernacle of witnessing and the altar, and filled it with water.
EXO 40:31 And Moses, and Aaron, and his sons, washed their hands and their feet therein,
EXO 40:32 when they entered into the tabernacle of the bond of peace, and nighed to the altar, as the Lord commanded to Moses.
EXO 40:33 He areared also the great porch, by compass of the tabernacle and of the altar, and setted a curtain in the entering thereof.
EXO 40:34 After that all things were perfectly made, a cloud covered the tabernacle of witnessing, and the glory of the Lord filled it;
EXO 40:35 neither Moses might enter into the tabernacle of the bond of peace, while the cloud covered all things, and the majesty of the Lord shined, for the cloud covered all things.
EXO 40:36 If any time the cloud left the tabernacle, the sons of Israel went forth by their companies;
EXO 40:37 if the cloud hanged there above, they dwelled in the same place;
EXO 40:38 for the cloud of the Lord rested on the tabernacle by day, and fire in the night, in the sight of the people of Israel, by all their dwellings.
DEU 1:1 These be the words which Moses spake to all Israel over Jordan, in the wilderness of the field, against the Red Sea, betwixt Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, where is full much gold,
DEU 1:2 by eleven days journey from Horeb by the way of the hill of Seir, till to Kadeshbarnea.
DEU 1:3 In the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, in the first day of the month, Moses spake to the sons of Israel all things which the Lord commanded to him that he should say to them,
DEU 1:4 after that he had smitten, or killed, Sihon, the king of Amorites, that dwelled in Heshbon, and Og, the king of Bashan, that dwelled in Ashtaroth, and in Edrei,
DEU 1:5 over Jordan, in the land of Moab. And Moses began to declare the law, and to say,
DEU 1:6 Our Lord God spake to us in Horeb, and said, It sufficeth to you that ye have dwelled in this hill;
DEU 1:7 turn ye again, and come ye to the hill of Amorites, and to other places that be next to it; and to the places of fields, and of hills, and to [[the]] lower places against the south, and beside the brink of the sea, to the land of Canaanites, and of Lebanon, till to the great flood Euphrates.
DEU 1:8 Lo, he saith, I have given to you that land; enter ye, and have it in possession, on which the Lord swore to your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that he should give that land to them, and to their seed after them.
DEU 1:9 And I said to you in that time, I may not alone sustain you,
DEU 1:10 for your Lord God hath multiplied you, and ye be full many today, as the stars of heaven;
DEU 1:11 the Lord God of your fathers add to this number many thousands, and bless you, as he spake.
DEU 1:12 I may not alone sustain, or bear, your causes, and your burdens, and strives;
DEU 1:13 give ye of you men wise, and witting, whose conversation is proved in your lineages, that I set [[or put]] them princes to you.
DEU 1:14 Then ye answered to me, The thing is good which thou wilt do.
DEU 1:15 And I took of your lineages men wise, and noble; and I ordained them to be your princes, your tribunes, and centurions, and quinquagenaries, and deans, which shall teach you all things.
DEU 1:16 And I commanded to them, and said, Hear ye the people, and deem ye that that is just, whether he be a citizen, or a pilgrim.
DEU 1:17 No difference shall be in doom of persons; ye shall hear so a little man, that is, poor, as a great man, neither ye shall take heed to the person of any man, for it is the doom of God. That if anything seemeth hard to you, tell ye that to me, and I shall hear it.
DEU 1:18 And I commanded all things which ye ought to do.
DEU 1:19 Forsooth we went forth from Horeb, and passed by a fearedful desert, and greatest wilderness, which ye saw, by the way of the hill of Amorites, as our Lord God commanded to us. And when we had come into Kadeshbarnea,
DEU 1:20 I said to you, Ye be come to the hill of Amorites, which your Lord God shall give to you;
DEU 1:21 see thou, Israel, the land that the Lord God shall give to thee; go thou up, and wield it, as our Lord God spake to thy fathers; dread thou not, neither in thine heart be thou anything aghast.
DEU 1:22 And all ye nighed to me, and ye said, Send we men, that shall behold the land, and shall tell us by what way we owe to go up thither, and to which cities we owe to go.
DEU 1:23 And when the word pleased to me, I sent of you twelve men, of each lineage one.
DEU 1:24 And when they had gone forth, and had gone up into the hilly places, they came unto the valley of Cluster; and when they had beheld the land,
DEU 1:25 they took of the fruits thereof, to show the plenty of it, and they brought those fruits to us, and said, The land is good that our Lord God shall give to us.
DEU 1:26 And ye would not go up thither, but ye were unbelieveful to the word of our Lord God.
DEU 1:27 And ye grutched in your taber-nacles, and ye said, The Lord hateth us, and therefore he led us out of the land of Egypt, that he should betake us in the hand of Amorites, and do away us.
DEU 1:28 Whither shall we ascend [[or go up]]? the messengers made afeared our heart, and said, A greatest multitude is, and larger in stature than we; the cities be great, and walled till to heaven; we saw there the sons of Anakim, that is, giants.
DEU 1:29 And I said to you, Have ye no dread, nor be ye aghast;
DEU 1:30 the Lord God himself, which is your leader, shall fight for you, as he did in Egypt, while all men saw.
DEU 1:31 And ye saw in the wilderness, thy Lord God bare thee, as a man is wont to bear his little son, in all the way by which ye went, till ye came to this place.
DEU 1:32 And soothly neither so ye believed to your Lord God,
DEU 1:33 that went before you in the way, and measured the place in which ye ought to set your tents, and he showed in the night the way to you by fire, and in the day by a pillar of cloud.
DEU 1:34 And when the Lord had heard the voice of your words, he was wroth, and swore, and said,
DEU 1:35 None of the men of this worst generation shall see the good land, which I promised under an oath to your fathers,
DEU 1:36 except Caleb, the son of Jephun-neh; forsooth he shall see it, and I shall give to him the land upon which he hath trodden, and to his sons, for he pursued [[or followed]] the Lord.
DEU 1:37 Neither the Lord’s indignation against the people is to be marvelled, since the Lord was wroth also to me for you, and said, Neither thou shalt enter thither,
DEU 1:38 but Joshua, the son of Nun, thy servant, he shall enter into that land for thee; excite, and strengthen thou him, and he shall part the land by lot to Israel.
DEU 1:39 Your little children, of which ye said, that they should be led prisoners, and the sons that know not today the diversity of good and of evil, they shall enter thither; and I shall give to them the land, and they shall wield it.
DEU 1:40 Soothly turn ye again, and go ye into the wilderness, by the way of the Red Sea.
DEU 1:41 And ye answered to me, We have sinned to the Lord; we shall go up, and we shall fight, as our Lord God commanded. And when ye were arrayed with arms, and went into the hill,
DEU 1:42 the Lord said to me, Say thou to them, Do not ye go up, neither fight ye, for I am not with you, lest ye fall before your enemies.
DEU 1:43 I spake this to you, and ye heard me not; but ye were adversaries to the commandment of the Lord, and swelling with pride, went up into the hill.
DEU 1:44 Therefore Amorites went out, that dwelled in the hills, and he came against you, and pursued you, as bees be wont to pursue, and he killed you down from Seir unto Hormah.
DEU 1:45 And when ye turned again, and wept before the Lord, he heard not you, neither would assent to your voice;
DEU 1:46 therefore ye sat in Kadesh by much time.
DEU 2:1 And we went forth from thence, and came into the wilderness that leadeth to the Red Sea, as the Lord said to me; and we compassed the hill of Seir in long time.
DEU 2:2 And the Lord said to me,
DEU 2:3 It sufficeth to you to compass this hill; go ye against the north.
DEU 2:4 And command thou to the people, and say, Ye shall pass by the terms of your brethren, the sons of Esau, that dwell in Seir, and they shall dread you. Therefore see ye diligently,
DEU 2:5 that ye be not moved against them; for I shall not give to you of their land as much as the step of one foot may tread, for I have given the hill of Seir into the possession of Esau.
DEU 2:6 Ye shall buy of them meats for money, and ye shall eat; and ye shall draw, and drink water bought.
DEU 2:7 Thy Lord God hath blessed thee in all the works of thine hands; he hath known thy way, how thou hast passed through this most wilderness, by forty years; and thy Lord God dwelled with thee, and nothing failed to thee.
DEU 2:8 And when we had passed by our brethren, the sons of Esau, that dwelled in Seir, by the way of the field of Elath, and of Eziongaber, we came to the way that leadeth into the desert of Moab.
DEU 2:9 And the Lord said to me, Fight thou not against Moabites, neither begin thou battle against them; for I shall not give to thee anything of their land, for I have given Ar into possession to the sons of Lot.
DEU 2:10 Emim were the first dwellers thereof, a great people, and strong, and so high,
DEU 2:11 that they were believed to be as giants, of the generation of Anakim, and they were like the sons of Anakim; forsooth Moabites call them Emim.
DEU 2:12 Soothly Horims dwelled before in Seir, and when they were put out, and were done away, the sons of Esau dwelled there, as Israel did in the land of his possession, which the Lord gave to him.
DEU 2:13 Therefore we rose up, that we should pass over the strand [[or stream]] of Zered, and we came to it.
DEU 2:14 Soothly the time in which we went from Kadeshbarnea till to the passing over of the strand [[or stream]] of Zered, was of eight and thirty years, till all the generation of fighting men was wasted from their tents, as the Lord had sworn;
DEU 2:15 whose hand was against them, that they should perish from the midst of their tents.
DEU 2:16 Soothly after that all the fighters had fallen down,
DEU 2:17 the Lord spake to me, and said,
DEU 2:18 Thou shalt pass by today the coasts of Moab, the city, Ar by name,
DEU 2:19 and thou shalt nigh into the coasts of the sons of Ammon; be thou ware that thou fight not against them, nor be moved to battle; for I shall not give to thee of the land of the sons of Ammon, for I have given it to the sons of Lot into possession.
DEU 2:20 It is reckoned the land of giants, and giants inhabited therein sometime, which giants Ammonites call Zamzum-mims;
DEU 2:21 a much people, and great, and of noble length, as Anakim, which the Lord did away from the face of them, and made them to dwell for those giants,
DEU 2:22 as he did to the sons of Esau, that dwelled in Seir, and did away Horims, and gave to them the land of Horims, which the sons of Esau wield till into present time.
DEU 2:23 Also men of Cappadocia putted out Avims, that dwelled in Hazerim, till to Gaza; which went out from Cappadocia, and did away Avims, and dwelled there for them.
DEU 2:24 Rise ye, and pass ye over the strand [[or the stream]] of Arnon; lo! I have betaken in thine hand Sihon, king of Heshbon, of Amorites; and his land begin thou to wield, and smite thou battle against him.
DEU 2:25 Today I shall begin to send thy dread, and thy fear into the peoples that dwell under all heaven, that when thy name is heard, they dread, and tremble, by the manner of women travailing of child, and be holden with sorrow.
DEU 2:26 Therefore I sent messengers from the wilderness of Kedemoth to Sihon, king of Heshbon; and I said with peaceable words,
DEU 2:27 We shall pass through thy land, we shall go in the common way; we shall not bow neither to the right side, nor to the left side.
DEU 2:28 Sell thou us meats for price, that we eat; give thou us water for money, and so we shall drink. Only it is that we ask of thee that thou grant passage to us,
DEU 2:29 as the sons of Esau did, that dwell in Seir, and the Moabites, that dwell in Ar, till we come to Jordan, and pass over to the land which our Lord God shall give to us.
DEU 2:30 And Sihon, king of Heshbon, would not give passage to us; for thy Lord God made hard his spirit, and made firm in evil the heart of him, that he should be betaken into thine hands, as thou seest now.
DEU 2:31 And the Lord said to me, Lo, I have begun to betake to thee Sihon, and his land; begin thou to wield it.
DEU 2:32 And Sihon went out against us with all his people, to battle in Jahaz.
DEU 2:33 And our Lord God betook him to us, and we have smitten him, with his sons, and all his people.
DEU 2:34 And we took in that time all the cities, when the dwellers of those cities, men, and women, and children, were slain; we left not in them any-thing,
DEU 2:35 except beasts that fell into the part of men taking prey, and except spoils of the cities which we took.
DEU 2:36 From Aroer, which is on the brink of the strand [[or the stream]] of Arnon, from the town which is set in the valley, unto Gilead, no town was, nor city, that escaped our hands. Our Lord God betook all to us;
DEU 2:37 except the land of the sons of Ammon, to which land we nighed not, and all things that lie to the strand [[or the stream]] of Jabbok, and except the cities of the mountains, and all the places from which our Lord God forbade us.
DEU 3:1 And so we turned, and went up by the way of Bashan; and Og, the king of Bashan, went out against us with his people, to fight in Edrei.
DEU 3:2 And the Lord said to me, Dread thou not him, for he is betaken into thine hand, with all his people, and his land; and thou shalt do to him, as thou didest to Sihon, king of Amorites, that dwelled in Heshbon.
DEU 3:3 Therefore our Lord God betook in our hands also Og, the king of Bashan, and all his people; and we have smitten him unto death,
DEU 3:4 and we wasted all his cities in one time; no town there was of his that escaped us; we destroyed sixty cities, all the country of Argob, of the realm of Og in Bashan.
DEU 3:5 All the cities were strengthened with most high walls, and with gates and bars; without towns unnumberable, that had no walls.
DEU 3:6 And we did away those men, as we did to Sihon, king of Heshbon; and we destroyed each city of that land, and the men, and the women, and little children;
DEU 3:7 and we took by prey beasts, and spoils of the cities.
DEU 3:8 And we took in that time the land from the hand of the two kings of Amorites, that were beyond Jordan, from the strand [[or stream]] of Arnon unto the hill of Hermon,
DEU 3:9 which hill Sidonians call Sirion, and Amorites call Shenir.
DEU 3:10 And we took all the cities that were set in the plain, and all the land of Gilead, and of Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the realm of Og, in Bashan.
DEU 3:11 For Og alone, king of Bashan, was left of the generation of giants; and his iron bed is showed, which is in Rabbath, of the sons of Ammon, and it hath nine cubits of length, and four cubits of breadth, at the measure of a cubit of a man’s hand.
DEU 3:12 And we wielded in that time the land, from Aroer, which is on the brink of the strand [[or stream]] of Arnon, unto the half part of the hill of Gilead; and I gave his cities to Reuben and to Gad.
DEU 3:13 And I gave the tother part of Gilead, and all Bashan, of the realm of Og, to the half lineage of Manasseh, and all the country of Argob. All Bashan was called the land of giants.
DEU 3:14 Jair, the son of Manasseh, wielded all the country of Argob, unto the land of Geshuri and of Maachathi; and he called by his name Bashanhavothjair, that is, the towns of Jair, till into this present day.
DEU 3:15 Also I gave Gilead to Machir;
DEU 3:16 and to the lineages of Reuben and of Gad I gave the land of Gilead, till to the strand [[or stream]] of Arnon, the middle of the strand, and of the ends till to the strand of Jabbok, which is the term of the sons of Ammon.
DEU 3:17 And I gave to them the plain of the wilderness, unto Jordan, and the terms of Chinnereth unto the sea of desert, the which is the most salty sea, at the roots of the hill of Pisgah, against the east.
DEU 3:18 And I commanded to you in that time, and said, Your Lord God giveth to you this land into heritage; all ye strong men,
DEU 3:19 without wives, and little children, and beasts, be ye made ready, and go ye before your brethren, the sons of Israel. For I know that ye have many beasts, and those shall dwell in the cities that I have given to you,
DEU 3:20 till the Lord give rest to your brethren, as he hath given to you, and till they also wield the land which the Lord shall give to them beyond Jordan; then each man shall turn again into his possession that I have given to you.
DEU 3:21 Also I commanded to Joshua in that time, and said, Thine eyes have seen what things your Lord God did to these two kings; so he shall do to all the realms, to which thou shalt go;
DEU 3:22 dread thou not them; [[the Lord our God shall fight for us]].
DEU 3:23 And I prayed the Lord in that time, and said,
DEU 3:24 Lord God, thou hast begun to show to me thy servant thy greatness, and thy full strong hand, for none other God there is, either in heaven, either in earth, that may do thy works, and may be comparisoned to thy strength.
DEU 3:25 Therefore I shall pass over, and shall see this best land beyond Jordan, and this noble hill, and Lebanon.
DEU 3:26 And the Lord was wroth to me for you, neither he heard me, but he said to me, It sufficeth to thee; speak thou no more of this thing to me.
DEU 3:27 Go thou up into the highness of Pisgah, and cast about thine eyes to the west, and north, and south, and east, and behold, for thou shalt not pass over this Jordan.
DEU 3:28 Command thou to Joshua, and strengthen thou him, and comfort him; for he shall go before this people, and he shall part to them the land, which thou shalt see.
DEU 3:29 And we dwelled in the valley against the temple of Bethpeor.
DEU 4:1 And now, thou Israel, hear the behests and dooms which I teach thee, that thou do those [[or them]], and live, and that thou enter and wield the land which the Lord God of your fathers shall give to you.
DEU 4:2 Ye shall not add to the word which I speak to you, neither ye shall take away from it; keep ye the commandments of your Lord God, which I command to you.
DEU 4:3 Your eyes saw all things which the Lord did against Baalpeor; how he all-brake all the worshippers of him from the midst of you.
DEU 4:4 Forsooth ye that cleaved to your Lord God live all till into present day.
DEU 4:5 Ye know that I taught you the behests and the rightwisenesses, as my Lord God commanded to me; so ye shall do them in the land that ye shall wield,
DEU 4:6 and ye shall keep, and fulfill them in work. For this is your wisdom and understanding before [[the]] peoples, that all men hear these behests, and say, Lo! a wise people and an under-standing! a great folk!
DEU 4:7 None other nation is so great, that hath Gods nighing to itself, as our God is ready to all our beseechings.
DEU 4:8 For what other folk is so noble, that it hath ceremonies, and just [[or rightwise]] dooms, and all the law, which I shall set forth today before your eyes?
DEU 4:9 Therefore keep thyself, and thy soul busily; forget thou not the words which thine eyes have seen, and fall they not down from thine heart, in all the days of thy life. Thou shalt teach those [[or them]]to thy sons, and thy sons’ sons.
DEU 4:10 Tell thou to them the day in which thou stoodest before thy Lord God in Horeb, when the Lord spake to me, and said, Gather thou the people to me, that it hear my words, and that it learn for to dread me in all time in which it liveth in earth, and teach his sons.
DEU 4:11 And ye nighed to the root of the hill, that burnt till to heaven; and darknesses, and cloud, and mist were therein.
DEU 4:12 And the Lord spake to you from the midst of [[the]] fire; ye heard the voice of his words, and utterly ye saw no form, or shape.
DEU 4:13 And he showed to you his covenant, which he commanded that ye should do, and [[the]] ten words, which he wrote in two tables of stone.
DEU 4:14 And he commanded to me in that time, that I should teach you ceremonies and dooms, which ye owe to do in the land which ye shall wield.
DEU 4:15 Therefore keep ye busily your minds; ye saw not any likeness in the day in which the Lord spake to you in Horeb, from the midst of the fire;
DEU 4:16 lest peradventure ye be deceived, and make to you a graven likeness, either an image of male, either female;
DEU 4:17 or a likeness of all beasts that be on earth, either of birds flying under heaven,
DEU 4:18 either of creeping beasts that be moved in the earth, either of fishes that dwell under the earth in waters;
DEU 4:19 lest peradventure, when thine eyes be raised up to heaven, thou see the sun, and the moon, and all the stars of heaven, and thou be deceived by error, and worship those things, and honour them, the which things thy Lord God made of nought, into the service of all folks that be under heaven.
DEU 4:20 Forsooth the Lord took you, and led you out of the iron furnace, or strong tribulation, of Egypt, that he should have a people of heritage, as it is in [[the]] present day.
DEU 4:21 And the Lord was wroth against me for your words, and swore that I should not pass over Jordan, and that I should not enter into the best land, which he shall give to you.
DEU 4:22 Lo! I die in this land; I shall not pass over Jordan; ye shall pass over it, and shall wield the noble land.
DEU 4:23 Be ye ware, lest any time thou forget the covenant of thy Lord God, which he made with thee, and lest thou make to thee a graven likeness of those things which the Lord hath forbidden thee to make.
DEU 4:24 For thy Lord God is a fire wasting; a jealous God.
DEU 4:25 If ye beget sons, and sons of sons, and ye dwell in the land, and ye be deceived, and make to you any likeness, or image, and do evil before your Lord God, that ye stir him to great wrath,
DEU 4:26 I call witness today heaven and earth, that ye shall perish soon from the land, that ye shall wield, when ye have passed over Jordan; ye shall not live long time therein, but the Lord shall do away you,
DEU 4:27 and he shall scatter you abroad among all heathen men, and ye shall dwell few among the nations, to which the Lord shall lead you.
DEU 4:28 And there ye shall serve to gods, that be made by men’s hands, to tree and to stone, that neither see, neither hear, neither eat, neither smell.
DEU 4:29 And when thou hast sought there thy Lord God, thou shalt find him; if nevertheless thou seekest him with all thy heart, and with all the tribulation of thy soul.
DEU 4:30 After that all things have found thee, that be before-said, soothly in the last time, thou shalt turn again to thy Lord God, and thou shalt hear his voice.
DEU 4:31 For thy Lord God is a merciful God; he shall not forsake thee, neither he shall do thee away utterly, neither he shall forget the covenant, in which he swore to thy fathers.
DEU 4:32 Ask thou of [[the]] eld [[or old]] days, or times, that were before thee, from the day in which thy Lord God made of nought man upon earth, ask thou from the one end of heaven unto the tother end thereof, that is, take heed to all things that ever were done, if such a thing was done any time,
DEU 4:33 either if it was ever known, that a people heard the voice of God speaking from the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard and seen;
DEU 4:34 either if that God went in, and took to himself a folk from the midst of nations, by temptations, miracles, and great wonders, by battle, and strong hand, and arm stretched forth, and horrible sights, by all things which your Lord God did for you in Egypt, in sight of thine eyes;
DEU 4:35 that thou shouldest know, that the Lord himself is God, and none other is, besides one.
DEU 4:36 From heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he should teach thee; and in [[the]] earth he showed to thee his full great fire, and thou heardest his words from [[the]] midst of the fire;
DEU 4:37 for he loved thy fathers, and chose their seed after them. And he led thee out of Egypt, and went before thee in his great strength,
DEU 4:38 that he should do away the greatest nations, and stronger than thou, in thine entering, and that he should lead thee in, and should give to thee their land into possession, as thou seest in present day.
DEU 4:39 Therefore know thou today, and think in thine heart, that the Lord himself is God in heaven above, and in earth beneath, and none other is.
DEU 4:40 Keep thou his behests, and his commandments, which I command to thee, that it be well to thee, and to thy sons after thee, and that thou dwell much time upon the land, which thy Lord God shall give to thee.
DEU 4:41 Then Moses separated three cities beyond Jordan at the east coast,
DEU 4:42 that he flee to those [[or them]], that slayeth his neighbour not willfully, and was not enemy before one and the tother day, and that he may flee to some of these cities;
DEU 4:43 Bezer in the wilderness, which is set in the field land, of the lineage of Reuben; and Ramoth in Gilead, which is in the lineage of Gad; and Golan in Bashan, which is in the lineage of Manasseh.
DEU 4:44 This is the law which Moses setted forth [[or purposed]] before the sons of Israel,
DEU 4:45 and these be the witnessings, and ceremonies, and the dooms, which he spake to the sons of Israel, when they went out of Egypt,
DEU 4:46 beyond Jordan, in the valley against the temple of Bethpeor, in the land of Sihon, king of Amorites, that dwelled in Heshbon, whom Moses killed. And the sons of Israel went out of Egypt,
DEU 4:47 and wielded his land, and the land of Og, king of Bashan, two kings of Amorites, that were beyond Jordan, at the rising of the sun;
DEU 4:48 from Aroer, which is set on the brink of the strand [[or stream]] of Arnon, till to the hill of Sion, which is Hermon;
DEU 4:49 and they wielded all the plain beyond Jordan, at the east coast, unto the sea of wilderness, and unto the roots of the hill of Pisgah.
DEU 5:1 And Moses called all Israel, and said to him, Hear, thou Israel, the ceremonies and dooms, which I speak today in your ears; learn ye them, and fulfilleth in deed.
DEU 5:2 Our Lord God made a bond of peace with us in Horeb;
DEU 5:3 he made not covenant with our fathers, but with us that be present, and live.
DEU 5:4 Face to face he spake to us in the hill, from the midst of the fire.
DEU 5:5 I was reconciler and a mediator betwixt God and you in that time, that I should tell to you his words, for ye dreaded the fire, and ye went not up into the hill. And he said,
DEU 5:6 I am thy Lord God, that led thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of servage.
DEU 5:7 Thou shalt not have alien Gods in my sight.
DEU 5:8 Thou shalt not make to thee a graven image, neither a likeness of all things that be in heaven above, and that be in earth beneath, and that be in waters under earth;
DEU 5:9 thou shalt not praise them, nor worship them; for I am thy Lord God, a jealous God; and I yield the wickedness of fathers into the sons, into the third and the fourth generation to them that hate me,
DEU 5:10 and I do mercy into many thousands to them that love me, and keep my behests.
DEU 5:11 Thou shalt not mistake the name of thy Lord God in vain, for he shall not be unpunished, that taketh the name of God in a vain thing.
DEU 5:12 Keep thou the sabbath day that thou hallow it, as thy Lord God commanded to thee.
DEU 5:13 In six days thou shalt work, and do all thy works;
DEU 5:14 the seventh day is the day of sabbath, that is, the rest of thy Lord God. Thou shalt not do therein anything of work; thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy servant, and thine handmaid, and thine ox, and thine ass, and all thy work beasts, and the pilgrim that is within thy gates; that thy servant rest and thine hand-maid, as also thou.
DEU 5:15 Have mind, that also thyself servedest in Egypt, and thy Lord God led thee out from thence, in a strong hand, and in an arm stretched forth; therefore he commanded to thee, that thou shouldest keep the sabbath day.
DEU 5:16 Honour thy father and thy mother, as thy Lord God commanded to thee, that thou live in long time, and that it be well to thee, in the land which thy Lord God shall give to thee.
DEU 5:17 Thou shalt not slay.
DEU 5:18 Thou shalt not do lechery.
DEU 5:19 Thou shalt not do theft.
DEU 5:20 Thou shalt not speak false witness-ing against thy neighbour.
DEU 5:21 Thou shalt not covet thy neigh-bour’s wife, nor his house, nor his field, nor his servant, nor his hand-maid, nor his ox, nor ass, and all things, that is, nothing of all the things, that be his.
DEU 5:22 The Lord spake these words to all your multitude, in the hill, from the midst of the fire, and of the cloud, and of the mist, with great voice, and he added to nothing more; and he wrote those words in two tables of stone, which he gave to me.
DEU 5:23 And after that ye heard the voice from the midst of the darknesses, and ye saw the hill burn, all ye princes of the lineages, and the greater men in birth, nighed to me,
DEU 5:24 and ye said, Lo! our Lord God hath showed to us his majesty and greatness; we heard his voice from [[the]] midst of the fire, and we have proved today that a man liveth, God speaking with man.
DEU 5:25 Why therefore shall we die, and shall this greatest fire devour us? For if we hear more the voice of our Lord God, we shall die.
DEU 5:26 What is each man, that he hear the voice of God living, that speaketh from [[the]] midst of the fire, as we have heard, and that he may live?
DEU 5:27 Rather nigh thou, and hear thou all things which our Lord God shall say to thee; and thou shalt speak to us, and we shall hear, and do those words.
DEU 5:28 And when the Lord had heard this, he said to me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken to thee; they have spoken well all things.
DEU 5:29 Who shall give that they have such soul, that they dread me, and keep all my commandments in all time, that it be well to them, and to the sons of them, without end?
DEU 5:30 Go thou, and say to them, Turn ye again into your tents.
DEU 5:31 Soothly stand thou here with me, and I shall speak to thee all [[the]] commandments, and ceremonies, and dooms, which thou shalt teach them, that they do those [[or them]] in the land which I shall give to them into possession.
DEU 5:32 Therefore keep ye, and do ye those things, which the Lord God hath commanded to you; ye shall not bow away, neither to the right side, nor to the left side,
DEU 5:33 but ye shall go by the way which your Lord God commanded, that ye live, and that it be well to you, and that your days be lengthened in the land of your possession.
DEU 6:1 These be the commandments, ceremonies, and dooms, which your Lord God commanded that I should teach you, and that ye do them in the land to which ye pass over to wield;
DEU 6:2 that thou dread thy Lord God, and keep all his commandments, and behests, which I command to thee, and to thy sons, and to the sons of thy sons, in all the days of thy life, that thy days be lengthened.
DEU 6:3 Thou Israel, hear, and keep, that thou do those things which the Lord commanded to thee, and that it be well to thee, and thou be multiplied more, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised, to give to thee a land flowing with milk and honey.
DEU 6:4 Thou Israel, hear, thy Lord God is one God.
DEU 6:5 Thou shalt love thy Lord God of all thine heart, and of all thy soul, and of all thy strength.
DEU 6:6 And these words which I command to thee today, shall be in thine heart;
DEU 6:7 and thou shalt tell those [[or them]] to thy sons, and thou shalt think upon them, sitting in thine house, and going in the way, lying down, and rising.
DEU 6:8 And thou shalt bind those [[or them]] as a sign in thine hand; and those [[or they]] shall be, and shall be moved before thine eyes;
DEU 6:9 and thou shalt write them in the lintel, and in the doorposts of thine house.
DEU 6:10 And when thy Lord God hath brought thee into the land, for which he swore to thy fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and he hath given to thee great cities, and best, which thou buildedest not,
DEU 6:11 houses full of all riches, which thou madest not, and cisterns, which thou diggedest not, vineyards, and olive places, which thou plantedest not, and when thou hast eaten, and art full-filled,
DEU 6:12 beware diligently, lest thou forget the Lord, that led thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of servage.
DEU 6:13 Thou shalt dread thy Lord God, and thou shalt serve him alone, and thou shalt swear by his name.
DEU 6:14 Ye shall not go after alien gods, of all heathen men that be in your compass or be about you;
DEU 6:15 for God is a fervent lover, thy Lord God is in the midst of thee, lest any time the strong vengeance or the fierceness of thy Lord God be wroth against thee, and do away thee from the face of the earth.
DEU 6:16 Thou shalt not tempt thy Lord God, as thou temptedest him in the place of tempting.
DEU 6:17 Keep thou the commandments of thy Lord God, and the witnessings, and ceremonies, which he hath commanded to thee;
DEU 6:18 and do thou that that is pleasing and good in the sight of the Lord, that it be well to thee, and that thou enter, and wield the best land, of which the Lord swore to thy fathers,
DEU 6:19 that he should do away all thine enemies before thee, as he hath spoken.
DEU 6:20 And when thy son shall ask thee tomorrow, that is, in time to coming, and shall say, What will or mean these witnessings, and ceremonies, and dooms to themselves, which our Lord God commanded to us?
DEU 6:21 thou shalt say to him, We were Pharaoh’s servants in Egypt, and the Lord led us out of Egypt, in a strong hand;
DEU 6:22 and he did miracles, and great wonders, and worst, that is, most painful vengeances, in Egypt, against Pharaoh, and all his house, in our sight.
DEU 6:23 And he led us out thereof, that he should give to us led in, the land of which he swore to our fathers.
DEU 6:24 And the Lord commanded to us, that we do all these lawful things, and dread our Lord God, that it be well to us, in all the days of our life, as it is today.
DEU 6:25 And he shall be merciful to us, if we shall do and keep all his behests, before our Lord God, as he commanded to us.
DEU 7:1 When thy Lord God hath led thee into the land, into which thou shalt enter to wield, and hath done away many folks before thee, Hittites, and Girgashites, and Amorites, Canaanites, and Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites; seven folks, of much greater number than thou art, and stronger than thou;
DEU 7:2 and when thy Lord God hath betaken them to thee, thou shalt smite them unto death, thou shalt not make with them a bond of peace, neither thou shalt have mercy upon them,
DEU 7:3 neither thou shalt fellowship marriages with them; thou shalt not give thy daughter to his son, neither thou shalt take his daughter to thy son;
DEU 7:4 for she shall deceive thy son, that he pursue [[or follow]] not me, that he serve more alien gods; and then the fierce vengeance of the Lord shall be wroth, and shall do away thee soon.
DEU 7:5 But rather thou shalt do these things to them; destroy ye their altars, and break ye their molten images of metal, and cut ye down their woods, and burn ye their graven images.
DEU 7:6 For thou art an holy people to thy Lord God; thy Lord God chose thee, that thou be a special people to him, of all peoples that be on earth.
DEU 7:7 Not for ye overcame in number all folks, the Lord is joined to you, and chose you, since ye be fewer than all peoples;
DEU 7:8 but for the Lord loved you, and kept the oath which he swore to your fathers; and he led you out in [[a]] strong hand, and again-bought you from the house of servage, from the house of Pharaoh, king of Egypt.
DEU 7:9 And thou shalt know, that thy Lord God himself is a strong God, and faithful, and keepeth covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his commandments, into a thousand generations;
DEU 7:10 and he yieldeth anon to them that hate him, so that he destroy them, and defer, or tarry, no longer; restoring, or yielding, anon to them that that they deserve.
DEU 7:11 Therefore keep thou the command-ments, and ceremonies, and dooms, which I command to thee today, that thou do them.
DEU 7:12 If after that thou hearest these dooms, thou keepest, and doest them, thy Lord God shall keep to thee covenant, and mercy, which he swore to thy fathers.
DEU 7:13 And he shall love thee, and multiply thee, and he shall bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy wheat, and thy vintage, thine oil, and thy droves of beasts, and the flocks of thy sheep, on the land for which he swore to thy fathers, that he should give it to thee.
DEU 7:14 Thou shalt be blessed among all peoples; none barren of ever either kind shall be with thee, as well in men, as in thy flocks.
DEU 7:15 The Lord shall do away from thee all ache; and he shall not bring to thee the full evil sicknesses of Egypt, that thou hast known, but to all thine enemies these sicknesses shall come.
DEU 7:16 And thou shalt devour, that is, destroy, all [[the]] peoples, which thy Lord God shall give to thee; thine eye shall not spare them, neither thou shalt serve their gods, lest they be into the falling of thee.
DEU 7:17 If thou sayest in thine heart, These folks be more than I, how may I do away them?
DEU 7:18 do not thou dread, but have thou mind, what things thy Lord God did to Pharaoh, and all the Egyptians;
DEU 7:19 he did to them the greatest vengeances, which thine eyes saw, and miracles, and great wonders, and the strong hand, and an arm stretched out, that thy Lord God should lead thee out thence; so he shall do to all peoples which thou dreadest.
DEU 7:20 Furthermore and thy Lord God shall send venomous flies into them, till he do away, and destroy all men, that fled thee, and they shall not be able to be hid.
DEU 7:21 Thou shalt not dread them, for thy Lord God is in the midst of thee, a great God, and fearful.
DEU 7:22 He himself shall waste these nations in thy sight, little and little, and by parts; thou shalt not be able to do away them altogether, lest per-adventure [[the]] beasts of the earth be multiplied against thee;
DEU 7:23 and thy Lord God shall give them to thee in thy sight, and he shall slay them, till they be done away utterly.
DEU 7:24 And he shall betake their kings into thine hands, and thou shalt destroy their names under heaven; none shall be able to against-stand thee, till thou all-break them.
DEU 7:25 Thou shalt burn in fire their graven images; thou shalt not covet the silver and gold, of which those images be made, neither thou shalt take of those [[or them]] anything to thee, lest thou offend therefore, for it is the abom-ination of thy Lord God.
DEU 7:26 Neither thou shalt bring anything of the idol into thine house, lest thou be made cursed, as also that idol is; thou shalt loathe it as filth, and thou shalt have it as defouling, and as filths of abomination, for it is cursed.
DEU 8:1 Be thou ware diligently, that thou do each commandment which I command to thee today, that ye may live, and be multiplied, and that ye enter, and wield the land, for which the Lord swore to your fathers.
DEU 8:2 And thou shalt have mind of all the way, by which thy Lord God led thee by forty years, in desert, that he should torment thee, and should assay thee; and that those things that were treated in thy soul should be known, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, either nay.
DEU 8:3 And he tormented thee with neediness, and he gave to thee meat, manna to eat, which thou knewest not, and thy fathers knew not, that he should show to thee, that a man liveth not in bread alone, but in each word that cometh out of the Lord’s mouth.
DEU 8:4 Thy clothes, with which thou were covered, failed not for eldness, and thy foot was not bruised under-neath, lo! the fortieth year is;
DEU 8:5 that thou think in thine heart, for as a man teacheth his son, so thy Lord God hath taught thee,
DEU 8:6 that thou keep the commandments of thy Lord God, and go in his ways, and dread him.
DEU 8:7 For thy Lord God shall lead thee into a good land, into the land of rivers, and of standing waters or ponds, and of wells, in whose fields and mountains the depths of floods break out;
DEU 8:8 into the land of wheat, of barley, and of vines, in which land fig trees, and pomegranates, and olives come forth; into the land of oil, and honey;
DEU 8:9 where thou shalt eat thy bread without neediness, and thou shalt use the plenty of all things; of which land the stones be iron, and metals of tin be digged of the hills thereof;
DEU 8:10 that when thou hast eaten, and art full-filled, thou bless thy Lord God for the best land which he hath given to thee.
DEU 8:11 Therefore keep thou, and beware, lest any time thou forget thy Lord God, and despise his commandments, and dooms, and ceremonies, which I command to thee today;
DEU 8:12 lest after that thou hast eaten, and art full-filled, hast builded fair houses, and hast dwelled in them,
DEU 8:13 and hast droves of oxen, and flocks of sheep, and plenty of silver, and of gold, and of all things,
DEU 8:14 thine heart be then raised, and thou think not upon thy Lord God, that led thee out of the land of Egypt, and from the house of servage,
DEU 8:15 and he was thy leader in the great wilderness and fearful, in which wilder-ness was a serpent burning with blast, and a scorpion, and dipsas, that is, an adder, that maketh them whom he stingeth to die for thirst, and utterly no waters were in the desert, the which Lord brought out streams of the hardest stone,
DEU 8:16 and he fed thee with manna in the wilderness, which manna thy fathers knew not. And after that the Lord had tormented thee, and proved thee, at the last he had mercy on thee,
DEU 8:17 lest thou wouldest say in thine heart, My strength, and the might of mine hand, hath given all these things to me.
DEU 8:18 But think thou upon thy Lord God, that he hath given strengths to thee, that he should fulfill his covenant, of which he swore to thy fathers, as this present day showeth.
DEU 8:19 Forsooth if thou forgettest thy Lord God, and pursuest [[or followest]] alien gods, and worshippest them in heart, and honourest [[them]]withoutforth, lo! now I before-say to thee, that thou shalt perish utterly;
DEU 8:20 as [[the]] heathen men perished, which the Lord did away in thine entering, so also ye shall perish, if ye shall be unobedient to the voice of your Lord God.
DEU 9:1 Hear thou, Israel; thou shalt pass over Jordan today, that thou wield the most nations, and stronger than thou; great cities, and walled till to heaven;
DEU 9:2 a great people, and high; the sons of Anakim, which thyself hast seen, and heard, which no man may against-stand in the contrary part.
DEU 9:3 Therefore thou shalt know today that thy Lord God himself shall pass over before thee; he is a fire devour-ing and wasting, that shall all-break them, and he shall do them away, and destroy them before thy face swiftly, as he spake to thee.
DEU 9:4 Say thou not in thine heart, when thy Lord God hath done them away in thy sight, For my rightwiseness the Lord hath brought me in hither, that I should wield the land; since these nations be done away for their wicked-nesses.
DEU 9:5 For not for thy rightwiseness, and for the equity of thine heart thou shalt enter, that thou wield their land; but for they did wickedly, they were done away, when thou enteredest, and that the Lord should [[ful]] fill his word which he promised under an oath to thy fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
DEU 9:6 Therefore know thou that not for thy rightwisenesses thy Lord God hath given to thee this best land into possession, since thou art a people of most hard noll.
DEU 9:7 Have thou mind, and forget not, how in the wilderness thou stirredest thy Lord God to great wrath; from that day in which thou wentest out of Egypt till to this place, thou hast striven ever[[more]] against the Lord.
DEU 9:8 For why also in Horeb, thou stirredest him, and he was wroth, and would have done thee away,
DEU 9:9 and when I went up into the hill, that I should take two tables of stone, the tables of covenant which the Lord made with you, and I abode in the hill forty days and forty nights, and I ate not bread, and I drank not water.
DEU 9:10 And the Lord gave to me two tables of stone, ever either written with God’s finger, and containing all the words which he spake to you in the hill, from the midst of the fire, when the company of people was gathered together.
DEU 9:11 And when forty days and so many nights had passed, the Lord gave to me two tables of stone, tables of the bond of peace;
DEU 9:12 and he said to me, Rise thou, and go down from hence soon, for thy people, that thou hast led out of Egypt, have forsaken swiftly the way that thou showedest to them, and they have made to them[[selves]] a molten calf.
DEU 9:13 And again the Lord said to me, I see that this people is of an hard noll;
DEU 9:14 suffer thou me, that I all-break him, and do away his name from under heaven; and I shall ordain thee on a folk which is greater and stronger than this folk.
DEU 9:15 And when I came down from the hill burning, and I held with either hand the two tables of the bond of peace,
DEU 9:16 and I saw, that ye had sinned to your Lord God, and had made to you a molten calf, and that ye had forsaken swiftly the way of God that he had showed to you,
DEU 9:17 then I threw down the tables from mine hands, and I brake those tables in your sight.
DEU 9:18 And I felled down before the Lord as before, in forty days and forty nights, and I ate not bread, and drank not water, for all your sins which ye did against the Lord, and stirred him to great wrath;
DEU 9:19 for I dreaded the indignation and the wrath of the Lord, by which he was stirred against you, and would do you away. And the Lord heard me also in this time praying for you.
DEU 9:20 Also the Lord was wroth greatly against Aaron, and would have all-broken him, and I prayed in like manner for him.
DEU 9:21 Forsooth I took your sin which ye made, that is, the calf, and burnt it in fire, and I all-brake it into gobbets, and I made it utterly into dust, and I cast it forth into the strand [[or stream]], that came down from the hill.
DEU 9:22 Also in the burning, and in the temptation at the waters of Against-saying, and in the Sepulchres of Covet-ousness, ye stirred the Lord;
DEU 9:23 and when I sent you from Kadesh-barnea, and said, Go ye up, and wield ye the land which I have given to you, and ye despised the com-mandment of your Lord God, and ye believed not to him, neither ye would hear his voice;
DEU 9:24 but ever[[more]] ye were rebel, from the day in which I began to know you.
DEU 9:25 And I lay before the Lord forty days and forty nights, in which I besought him meekly, that he should not do away you, as he menaced [[or threatened]].
DEU 9:26 And I prayed him, and said, Lord God, destroy not thy people, and thine heritage, which thou again-boughtest in thy greatness, which thou leddest out of Egypt in strong hand.
DEU 9:27 Have thou mind of thy servants, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; behold thou not the hardness of this people, and the wickedness, and the sin thereof,
DEU 9:28 lest peradventure the dwellers of the land, out of which thou leddest us, say, The Lord might not bring them into the land which he promised to them, and he hated them; therefore he led them out that he should slay them in wilderness;
DEU 9:29 and Lord, they be thy people, and thine heritage, which thou leddest out in thy great strength, and in thine arm stretched forth.
DEU 10:1 In that time the Lord said to me, Hew thou two tables of stone to thee, as the former were; and go thou up to me into the hill. And thou shalt make an ark, either a coffer, of wood,
DEU 10:2 and I shall write in the tables, the words that were in these tables which thou brakest before; and thou shalt put those tables into the ark.
DEU 10:3 Therefore I made an ark of the wood of shittim, and when I had hewn the two tables of stone, at the likeness of the former tables, I went up into the hill, and I had the tables in mine hands.
DEU 10:4 And he wrote in the tables, by that that he had written before, the ten words, which the Lord spake to you in the hill, from the midst of the fire, when the people was gathered, and the Lord gave the tables to me.
DEU 10:5 And I turned again from the hill, and came down, and I put the tables into the ark that I had made, which tables be there hitherto, as the Lord commanded to me.
DEU 10:6 And the sons of Israel moved their tents from Beeroth of the sons of Jaakan into Mosera, where Aaron was dead, and buried, for whom his son Eleazar was set in priesthood.
DEU 10:7 From thence they came into Gudgodah; from which place they went forth, and setted tents in Jot-bathah, in the land of waters and of strands [[or streams]].
DEU 10:8 In that time I separated the lineage of Levi, that it should bear the ark of the bond of peace of the Lord, and it should stand before him in service, and should bless in his name, into this present day.
DEU 10:9 For which thing Levi had no part, neither possession with his brethren, for the Lord himself is his possession, as thy Lord God promised to him.
DEU 10:10 And I stood in the hill as I did before, forty days and forty nights, and the Lord heard me also in this time, and he would not lose thee.
DEU 10:11 And he said to me, Go thou, and go before this people, that it enter, and wield the land which I swore to their fathers, that I should give to them.
DEU 10:12 And now, Israel, what asketh thy Lord God of thee, but that thou dread thy Lord, and go in his ways, and that thou love him, and serve thy Lord God in all thine heart, and in all thy soul;
DEU 10:13 and that thou keep the command-ments of thy Lord God, and the ceremonies of him, which I command to thee today, that it be well to thee.
DEU 10:14 Lo! heaven is of thy Lord God, and heaven of heaven; the earth and all things that be therein be his;
DEU 10:15 and nevertheless the Lord was joined to thy fathers, and he loved them, and he chose their seed after them, and you of all folks, as it is proved today.
DEU 10:16 Therefore circumcise ye the prepuce, that is, the uncleanness, of your heart, and no more make ye hard your noll.
DEU 10:17 For your Lord God himself is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, and mighty, and fearful, which taketh not a person, neither gifts, but justly he deemeth rich and poor.
DEU 10:18 He maketh doom to the father-less, and motherless, and to the widow; he loveth a pilgrim, and giveth to him lifelode and clothing.
DEU 10:19 And therefore love ye pilgrims, for also ye were comelings in the land of Egypt.
DEU 10:20 Thou shalt dread thy Lord God, and thou shalt serve him alone, and thou shalt cleave to him, and thou shalt swear in his name.
DEU 10:21 He is thy praising, and thy God, that made to thee these great works, and fearful, which thine eyes have seen.
DEU 10:22 In seventy men thy fathers went down into Egypt, and lo! now thy Lord God hath multiplied thee as the stars of heaven.
DEU 11:1 Therefore love thy Lord God, and keep thou his commandments, and ceremonies, and dooms, and his behests, in all time.
DEU 11:2 Know ye today those things which your sons know not, which sons have not seen the doctrine of your Lord God, nor his great works, and his strong hand, and his stretched arm,
DEU 11:3 his miracles, and his works, which he did in the midst of Egypt, to Pharaoh, [[the]] king, and to all his land,
DEU 11:4 and to all the host of the Egyptians, and to their horses, and cars [[or chariots]]; how the waters of the Red Sea covered them, when they pursued you, and the Lord did away them till into present day;
DEU 11:5 and which things the Lord did to you in wilderness, till ye came to this place;
DEU 11:6 and to Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, that was the son of Reuben, which the earth swallowed, when his mouth was opened, with their households, and tabernacles, and all the chattel that they had, in the midst of Israel.
DEU 11:7 Your eyes saw all the great works of the Lord, which he did,
DEU 11:8 that ye keep all his behests which I command today to you, and that ye may enter, and wield the land,
DEU 11:9 to which ye shall enter, and ye live therein much time; which land, flowing with milk and honey, the Lord promised under an oath to your fathers and their seed.
DEU 11:10 For the land, to which thou shalt enter to wield, is not as the land of Egypt, out of which thou wentest, where when the seed is sown in the manner of gardens, moist waters be led thereto;
DEU 11:11 but the land that Israel shall wield is hills, and fields, and it abideth rains from heaven,
DEU 11:12 which land thy Lord God behold-eth, and his eyes be therein, from the beginning of the year unto the end thereof.
DEU 11:13 Therefore if ye shall obey to my behests which I command today to you, that ye love your Lord God, and serve him in all your heart, and in all your soul;
DEU 11:14 he shall give to your land rain timely and late, that ye gather wheat, and wine, and oil,
DEU 11:15 hay of the fields to feed beasts, that ye both eat and be full-filled.
DEU 11:16 Be ye ware, lest peradventure your heart be deceived, and ye go away from the Lord, and serve alien gods, and worship them;
DEU 11:17 and the Lord therefore be wroth, and close heaven, and rain come not down, neither the earth give his fruit, and ye perish swiftly from the full good land that the Lord shall give to you.
DEU 11:18 Put ye these my words in your hearts and in your souls, and hang ye them up for a token, or a sign, in your hands, and set ye them betwixt your eyes.
DEU 11:19 Teach ye your sons, that they think upon those words, when thou sittest in thine house, and goest in the way, and liest down, and risest up.
DEU 11:20 Thou shalt write those words upon the doorposts, and the gates of thine house,
DEU 11:21 that the days of thee and of thy sons be multiplied in the land which the Lord swore to thy fathers, that he should give to them, as long as heaven is above earth.
DEU 11:22 For if ye keep the behests which I command to you, and do those [[or them]], that ye love your Lord God, and go in all his ways, and cleave to him,
DEU 11:23 the Lord shall destroy all these heathen men before your face, and ye shall wield those folks that be greater and stronger than ye.
DEU 11:24 Each place which your foot shall tread, shall be yours; from the desert, and from Lebanon, and from the great flood Euphrates unto the west sea, shall be your terms.
DEU 11:25 None shall stand against you; your Lord God shall give your outward dread and your inward dread upon each land that ye shall tread, as he spake to you.
DEU 11:26 Lo! I set forth in your sight today blessing and cursing;
DEU 11:27 blessing, if ye obey to the behests of your Lord God, which I command to you today;
DEU 11:28 cursing, if ye hear not the behests of your Lord God, but go away from the way which I show now to you, and go after alien gods, which ye know not.
DEU 11:29 Soothly when thy Lord God hath brought thee into the land, to which to inhabit thou goest, thou shalt set blessing upon the hill Gerizim, cursing upon the hill Ebal,
DEU 11:30 which hills be beyond Jordan, after the way that goeth to the going down of the sun, in the land of Canaanites, that dwell in the field places against Gilgal, which is beside the valley going and entering far.
DEU 11:31 For ye shall pass over Jordan, that ye wield the land which your Lord God shall give to you, and that ye have and wield that land.
DEU 11:32 Therefore see ye, that ye fulfill the ceremonies and dooms, which I shall set today in your sight.
DEU 12:1 These be the behests and dooms, which ye owe to do, in the land which the Lord God of thy fathers shall give to thee, that thou wield it, in all days in which thou shalt go upon [[the]] earth.
DEU 12:2 Destroy ye all the places wherein [[the]] heathen men which ye shall wield, worshipped their gods, on high mountains, and little hills, and under each tree full of boughs.
DEU 12:3 Destroy ye their altars, and break their images; and burn ye the woods with fire, and all-break ye the idols; destroy ye their names from the places.
DEU 12:4 Ye shall not do so to your Lord God;
DEU 12:5 but ye shall come to the place which your Lord God choose of all your lineages, that he put his name there, and dwell therein;
DEU 12:6 and ye shall come thither, and offer in that place your burnt sacrifices, and slain sacrifices, the tithes, and first fruits of your hands, and avows [[or vows]], and gifts, and the first engendered things of your oxen, and of sheep.
DEU 12:7 And ye and your houses shall eat there in the sight of your Lord God; and ye shall be glad in all things to which ye put the hand, in which your Lord God hath blessed you.
DEU 12:8 Ye shall not do there those things which we do here today, each man that that seemeth rightful [[or right]] to himself.
DEU 12:9 For unto the time that is now, ye came not to rest, and to [[the]] pos-session, which the Lord God shall give to you.
DEU 12:10 Ye shall pass over Jordan, and ye shall dwell in the land which your Lord God shall give to you, that ye rest from all enemies about, and that ye dwell without any dread.
DEU 12:11 In the place which your Lord God choose that his name be therein. Thither ye shall bear all things, which I command to you, burnt sacrifices, and sacrifices, and the tithes, and the first fruits of your hands, and whatever is the best thing in gifts, which ye avow to the Lord.
DEU 12:12 There ye shall eat before your Lord God, ye, and your sons, and daughters, your menservants, and womenservants, and the deacons [[or Levites]], that dwell in your cities; for they have none other part and possession among you.
DEU 12:13 Be thou ware lest thou offer thy burnt sacrifices in each place that thou seest,
DEU 12:14 but in that place which the Lord [[shall]] choose in one of thy lineages, thou shalt offer sacrifices, and thou shalt do whatever things I command to thee.
DEU 12:15 For if thou wilt eat, and the eating of flesh delighteth thee, slay thou, and eat, by the blessing of thy Lord God, that he hath given to thee in thy cities, whether it is unclean, that is, spotted, either wemmed, and feeble, either clean, and without wem, that is, whole in each member, which is leaveful to be offered, thou shalt eat those, as a capret, and an hart;
DEU 12:16 only without eating of [[the]] blood, which thou shalt shed [[or pour]] out as water upon the earth.
DEU 12:17 Thou shalt not be able to eat in thy cities the tithes of thy wheat, thy wine, and of thine oil, nor the first engendered things of thy droves, and of thy sheep, and all things which thou hast avowed, and wilt offer by free will, and the first fruits of thine hands;
DEU 12:18 but thou shalt eat those things before thy Lord God, in the place which thy Lord God choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy manservant, and thy womanservant, and the deacon [[or Levite]] that dwelleth in thy cities; and thou shalt be glad, and thou shalt be fulfilled before thy Lord God in all things to which thou holdest forth thine hand.
DEU 12:19 Be thou ware lest thou forsake the deacon [[or the Levite]] in all time, in which thou livest in earth.
DEU 12:20 When thy Lord God hath alarged thy terms, as he spake to thee, and thou wilt eat flesh, which thy soul desireth,
DEU 12:21 forsooth if the place is far, which thy Lord God choose, that his name be there, thou shalt slay of thine oxen, and sheep, which thou hast, as the Lord commanded to thee; and thou shalt eat in thy cities as it pleaseth thee.
DEU 12:22 As a capret and an hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat those [[or them]]; both a clean man and an unclean shall eat thereof in common.
DEU 12:23 Only eschew thou this, that thou eat not blood; for the blood of those beasts is for the life, and therefore thou owest not eat the life with fleshes,
DEU 12:24 but thou shalt pour it out as water upon the earth,
DEU 12:25 that it be well to thee, and to thy sons after thee, when thou hast done that, that pleaseth in the sight of the Lord.
DEU 12:26 Soothly thou shalt take that that thou hast avowed, and hallowed to the Lord, and thou shalt come to the place which the Lord choose;
DEU 12:27 and thou shalt offer there thine offerings, and flesh, and blood, upon the altar of thy Lord God; thou shalt pour in the altar the blood of the sacrifices; but thou shalt eat the flesh.
DEU 12:28 Keep thou and hear all things which I command to thee, that it be well to thee, and to thy sons after thee, without end, when thou hast done that, that is good and pleasing in the sight of thy Lord God.
DEU 12:29 When thy Lord God hath destroyed before thy face [[the]] folks, to which thou shalt enter and wield, and when thou hast wielded those folks, and hast dwelled in their land,
DEU 12:30 be thou ware lest thou pursue [[or follow]] them, after that they be destroyed, when thou enterest, and thou seek their ceremonies, and say, As these folks worshipped their gods, so and I shall worship.
DEU 12:31 Thou shalt not do in like manner to thy Lord God; for they did to their gods all the abominations which the Lord loatheth, and they offered their sons and their daughters, and they burnt them with fire.
DEU 12:32 Do thou to the Lord this thing only which I command to thee, neither add thou anything, neither abate.
DEU 13:1 If a prophet riseth in the midst of thee, either he that saith himself to have seen a dream, and he before-saith a sign, and a wonder to come after,
DEU 13:2 and this thing that he said befalleth, and he saith to thee, Go we, and pursue [[or follow]] we alien gods, which thou knowest not, and serve we them,
DEU 13:3 thou shalt not hear the words of that prophet, either of that dreamer; for your Lord God assayeth you, that he know openly whether ye love him, either nay, in all your heart, and in all your soul.
DEU 13:4 Pursue [[or follow]] ye your Lord God, and dread ye him; keep ye his commandments, and hear ye his voice; ye shall serve him, and ye shall cleave to him.
DEU 13:5 And that prophet, either feigner of dreams, shall be slain; for he spake that he should turn you away from your Lord God, that led you out of the land of Egypt, and again-bought you from the house of servage, that he make thee to err from the way that thy Lord God commanded to thee; and in killing of him thou shalt do away evil from the midst of thee.
DEU 13:6 If thy brother, the son of thy mother, either thy son, either thy daughter, either the wife which is in thy bosom, either thy friend, whom thou lovest as thy soul, will counsel thee, and saith privily, Go we and serve alien gods, which thou knowest not, and thy fathers know not,
DEU 13:7 of all the folks about, that be nigh either far, from the beginning unto the end of the land,
DEU 13:8 assent thou not to him, neither hear thou him, neither thine eye spare him, that thou have mercy of him, and hide him,
DEU 13:9 but anon thou shalt slay him. Thine hand be first upon him, and after thee, all the people put to hand.
DEU 13:10 He shall be oppressed with stones, and shall be slain; for he would draw thee away from thy Lord God, that led thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of servage,
DEU 13:11 that all Israel hear this and dread, and do no more anything like this thing.
DEU 13:12 If thou hearest any men saying in one of thy cities, which thy Lord God shall give thee to dwell in,
DEU 13:13 The sons of Belial went out from the midst of thee, and turned away the dwellers of the city, and said, Go we, and serve alien gods, which ye knew not,
DEU 13:14 inquire thou busily, and when the truth of the thing is beholden diligently, if thou findest that this thing is certain, that is said, and that this abomination is done indeed,
DEU 13:15 anon thou shalt smite the dwellers of that city with the sharpness of sword, and thou shalt destroy that city, and all things that be therein, unto the beasts.
DEU 13:16 Also whatever thing of appurtenance of household is found there, thou shalt gather it together in [[the]] midst of the streets thereof, and thou shalt burn it with that city, so that thou waste all things before thy Lord God, and it be a burial everlasting; it shall no more be builded.
DEU 13:17 And nothing of that cursing shall dwell in thine hand, that the Lord be turned away from the wrath of his strong vengeance, and have mercy upon thee, and multiply thee, as he swore to thy fathers.
DEU 13:18 When thou hast heard the voice of thy Lord God, thou shalt keep all his behests which I command to thee today, that thou do that thing that is pleasing in the sight of thy Lord God.
DEU 14:1 Be ye the sons of your Lord God; ye shall not cut yourselves, neither ye shall make baldness, upon a dead man,
DEU 14:2 for thou art an holy people to thy Lord God, and he chose thee that thou be to him into a special people, of all the folks that be upon earth.
DEU 14:3 Eat ye not those things that be unclean.
DEU 14:4 This is a beast which ye shall eat; an ox, and a sheep, and a goat,
DEU 14:5 an hart, a capret, a wild ox, tragelaph, that is, a beast in part like a goat buck, and in part like an hart, a pygarg, an ostrich, a camelopard.
DEU 14:6 Ye shall eat each beast that parteth the claw into two parts, and cheweth the cud.
DEU 14:7 And ye shall not eat these beasts, of them that chew the cud, and part not the claw; a camel, an hare, and a coney; for these chew the cud, and part not the claw, they shall be unclean to you;
DEU 14:8 also a swine, for it parteth the claw, and cheweth not the cud, shall be unclean; ye shall not eat the flesh of them, and ye shall not touch their dead bodies.
DEU 14:9 Ye shall eat these things, of all that dwell in waters; eat ye those things that have fins and scales;
DEU 14:10 eat ye not those things that be without fins and scales, for those be unclean.
DEU 14:11 Eat ye all clean birds;
DEU 14:12 eat ye not unclean birds, that is, an eagle, and a gripe, and an aliet,
DEU 14:13 an heron, and a vulture, and a kite by his kind,
DEU 14:14 and all thing of ravens’ kind,
DEU 14:15 and a struthio, and a night crow, and a lari, and an hawk by his kind,
DEU 14:16 a falcon, and a swan, and a ciconia,
DEU 14:17 and a dipper, a porphyrio, and a rearmouse, a cormorant,
DEU 14:18 and a calidris, all in their kind; also a lapwing and a bat.
DEU 14:19 And all thing that creepeth, and hath fins, shall be unclean, and shall not be eaten.
DEU 14:20 Eat ye all thing that is clean;
DEU 14:21 but whatever thing is dead by itself, eat ye not thereof. Give thou meat to the pilgrim that is within thy gates, that he eat, either sell thou meat to him, for thou art an holy people of thy Lord God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk.
DEU 14:22 Thou shalt separate the tenth part of all thy fruits that come forth in the land by each year;
DEU 14:23 and thou shalt eat in the sight of thy Lord God, in the place which he choose, that his name be called therein; thou shalt offer the tithe of thy wheat, of wine, and oil, and the first engendered things of thy droves, and of thy sheep, that thou learn to dread thy Lord God in all time.
DEU 14:24 But when the way is longer, and the place that thy Lord God choose is far, and he hath blessed, or increased, thee, and thou mayest not bring all these things to that place,
DEU 14:25 thou shalt sell all these things, and shalt turn them into price, and thou shalt bear them in thine hand, and thou shalt go to the place which thy Lord God choose;
DEU 14:26 and thou shalt buy of the same money whatever thing pleaseth to thee, either of droves, either of sheep; also thou shalt buy wine, and cider, and all things that thy soul desireth; and thou shalt eat before thy Lord God, and thou shalt make feast, thou, and thine house,
DEU 14:27 and the deacon [[or Levite]] that is within thy gates; be thou ware lest thou forsake him, for he hath not other part in thy possession.
DEU 14:28 In the third year thou shalt separate another tithe of all things that grow to thee in that year, and thou shalt keep it within thy gates.
DEU 14:29 And the deacon [[or Levite]] shall come, that hath none other part nor possession with thee, and the pilgrim, and the fatherless, either motherless child, and the widow, that be within thy gates, and they shall eat, and be fulfilled, that thy Lord God bless thee, in all the works of thine hands which thou shalt do.
DEU 15:1 In the seventh year thou shalt make remission,
DEU 15:2 that shall be fulfilled by this order. To whom anything is owed, of his friend, either neighbour, and brother, he shall not be able to ask it, for it is the year of remission, or forgiveness, of the Lord.
DEU 15:3 Thou shalt ask it of a pilgrim, that is, a stranger, or he that is not of the faith of Jews, and of a comeling; thou hast no power to ask it of a citizen and of a neighbour;
DEU 15:4 and utterly a needy man and a beggar shall not be among you, that thy Lord God bless thee, in the land which he shall give to thee into possession.
DEU 15:5 If nevertheless thou shalt hear the voice of thy Lord God, and shalt keep all things which he commanded, and which I command today to thee,
DEU 15:6 he shall bless thee, as he promised. Thou shalt lend to many folks, and thou shalt not take borrowing of any man; thou shalt be lord of full many nations, and no man shall be lord of thee.
DEU 15:7 If one of thy brethren that dwell within the gates of thy city, in the land which thy Lord God shall give to thee, cometh to poverty, thou shalt not make hard thine heart, neither thou shalt withdraw thine hand,
DEU 15:8 but thou shalt open it to the poor man, and thou shalt lend him whatso thou seest him have need to.
DEU 15:9 Be thou ware lest peradventure [[a]] wicked thought creep privily to thee, and thou say in thine heart, The seventh year of remission, nigheth; and thou turn away thine eyes from thy poor brother, and thou wilt not give to him the loan that he asketh; lest he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be made to thee into sin.
DEU 15:10 But thou shalt give to him, and thou shalt not do anything falsely in relieving his needs, that thy Lord God bless thee in all time, and in all things to which thou shalt put to thine hand.
DEU 15:11 Poor men shall not fail in the land of thy dwelling; therefore I command to thee, that thou open thy hand to thy brother needy poor, that live with thee in the land.
DEU 15:12 When thy brother, an Hebrew man, either an Hebrew woman, is sold to thee, and hath served thee six years, in the seventh year thou shalt deliver him free.
DEU 15:13 And thou shalt not suffer him go away from thee void, to whom thou hast given freedom;
DEU 15:14 but thou shalt give him lifelode in the way, of thy flocks, and of thy cornfloor, and of thy presser [[or wine press]], in which thy Lord God hath blessed thee.
DEU 15:15 Have thou mind that also thou servedest in the land of Egypt, and thy Lord God delivered thee, and therefore I command now to thee.
DEU 15:16 But if he say, I will not go out, for he loveth thee, and thine house, and he feeleth that it is well to him with thee,
DEU 15:17 thou shalt take an awl, and thou shalt pierce his ear in the door of thine house, and he shall serve thee till into the world; also thou shalt do in like manner to an handmaid.
DEU 15:18 Thou shalt not turn away from them thine eyes, when thou shalt deliver them free, for by the hire of an hired man they served thee by six years; that thy Lord God bless thee, in all the works which thou doest.
DEU 15:19 Of the first engendered things that be born in thy droves, and in thy sheep, whatever is of male kind, thou shalt hallow to thy Lord God. Thou shalt not work with the first engend-ered thing of oxen, and thou shalt not shear the first engendered things of sheep.
DEU 15:20 Thou shalt eat those [[or them]] by all years in the sight of thy Lord God, thou, and thine house, in the place which the Lord choose.
DEU 15:21 And if it have a wem, either is crooked, either blind, either is foul, either feeble in any part, it shall not be offered to thy Lord God;
DEU 15:22 but thou shalt eat it within the gates of thy city, both a clean man and an unclean shall eat of those [[or them]] in like manner, as of a capret, and of an hart.
DEU 15:23 Only thou shalt keep this, that thou eat not the blood of those [[or them]], but shed [[or pour]] it out as water into the earth.
DEU 16:1 Keep thou the month of new fruits, and of the beginning of summer, that thou make pask to thy Lord God; for in this month thy Lord God led thee out of Egypt in the night.
DEU 16:2 And thou shalt offer pask to thy Lord God, of sheep, and of oxen, in the place which thy Lord God choose, that his name dwell there.
DEU 16:3 Thou shalt not eat therein bread dighted with sourdough; in seven days thou shalt eat bread of affliction, with-out sourdough, for suddenly, either hastily, thou wentest out of Egypt, that thou have mind of the day of thy going out of Egypt, in all the days of thy life.
DEU 16:4 Nothing dighted with sourdough shall appear in all thy coasts by seven days, and of the flesh of that that is offered in the eventide, shall not dwell in the first day in the morrowtide.
DEU 16:5 Thou shalt not be able to offer pask in each of thy cities which thy Lord God shall give to thee,
DEU 16:6 but in the place which thy Lord God choose, that his name dwell there; thou shalt offer pask in the eventide, at the going down of the sun, when thou wentest out of Egypt.
DEU 16:7 And thou shalt seethe thy offering, and eat it, in the place which thy Lord God hath chosen, and thou shalt rise in the morrowtide of the second day, and thou shalt go into thy tabernacles.
DEU 16:8 Six days thou shalt eat therf bread; and in the seventh day, for it is the gathering of thy Lord God, thou shalt not do work.
DEU 16:9 Thou shalt number to thee seven weeks, from that day in which thou settedest a sickle into the corn;
DEU 16:10 and thou shalt hallow the feast days of weeks to thy Lord God, a willful offering of thine hand, which thou shalt offer by the blessing of thy Lord God.
DEU 16:11 And thou shalt eat before thy Lord God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy servant, and thine handmaid, and the deacon or Levite that is within thy gates, and the comeling, and the fatherless, either motherless child, and the widow, that dwell with you, in the place which thy Lord God choose, that his name dwell there.
DEU 16:12 And thou shalt have mind for thou were servant in Egypt, and thou shalt keep and do those things that be commanded.
DEU 16:13 And thou shalt hallow the solemnity of tabernacles by seven days, when thou hast gathered thy fruits of thy cornfloor, and of the presser [[or wine press]].
DEU 16:14 And thou shalt eat in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thine hand-maid, also the deacon [[or Levite]], and the comeling, and the fatherless, either motherless child, and the widow, that be within thy gates.
DEU 16:15 By seven days thou shalt hallow feasts to thy Lord God, in the place which the Lord choose; and thy Lord God shall bless thee, in all thy fruits, and in all the work of thine hands, and thou shalt be in gladness.
DEU 16:16 In three times by the year all thy male kind shall appear in the sight of thy Lord, in the place which he choose, in the solemnity of therf loaves, and in the solemnity of weeks, and in the solemnity of tabernacles. A man shall not appear void before the Lord;
DEU 16:17 but each man shall offer after that that he hath, by the blessing of his Lord God, that he gave to him.
DEU 16:18 Thou shalt ordain judges, and exactors, in all thy gates which thy Lord God shall give to thee, by each of thy lineages, that they deem the people by just [[or right]] doom,
DEU 16:19 and bow they not into the other part for favour, either gift. Thou shalt not take a person, neither gifts, for why gifts blind the eyes of wise men, and change the words of just [[or rightwise]] men.
DEU 16:20 Thou shalt pursue justly [[or right-wisely]] that that is just [[or right]], that thou live, and wield the land which thy Lord God shall give to thee.
DEU 16:21 Thou shalt not plant a wood, and each tree, by the altar of thy Lord God;
DEU 16:22 neither thou shalt make to thee, and ordain an image; which things thy Lord God hateth.
DEU 17:1 Thou shalt not offer to thy Lord God an ox and a sheep in which is a wem, either anything of vice or reproof, for it is abomination to thy Lord God.
DEU 17:2 And when a man either a woman, that do evil in the sight of thy Lord God, be found with thee, within one of thy gates which thy Lord God shall give to thee, and they break the covenant of God,
DEU 17:3 that they go and serve alien gods, and worship them, the sun, and the moon, and all the knighthood of heaven, which things I commanded not;
DEU 17:4 and this is told to thee, and thou hearest it, and inquirest diligently, and thou findest that it is sooth, and that abomination is done in Israel;
DEU 17:5 thou shalt lead out the man and the woman, that did that most cursed thing, to the gates of thy city, and they shall be oppressed with stones.
DEU 17:6 He that shall be slain, shall perish in the mouth of twain [[or two]], either of three witnesses; no man be slain, for one man saith witnessing against him.
DEU 17:7 The hand of the witnesses shall first slay him, and at the last the hand of the other people shall be put to, for to throw him down with stones, that thou do away evil from the midst of thee.
DEU 17:8 If thou perceivest, that hard and doubtful doom is with thee, betwixt blood and blood, cause and cause, leprosy and not leprosy, and thou seest that the words of [[the]] judges within thy gates be diverse in their deeming; rise thou, and go up to the place that thy Lord God hath chosen;
DEU 17:9 and thou shalt come to the priests of the kin of Levi, and to the judge that is in that time, and thou shalt ask of them, which shall show to thee the truth of [[the]] doom.
DEU 17:10 And thou shalt do, whatever thing they say, that be sovereigns in the place which the Lord choose, and teach thee by the law of the Lord;
DEU 17:11 thou shalt pursue [[or follow]] the sentence of them; thou shalt not bow therefrom to the right side, either to the left.
DEU 17:12 For that man shall die, that is proud, and will not obey to the behest of the priest, that ministereth in that time to thy Lord God, and to the sentence of the judge, and thou shalt do away evil from the midst of Israel;
DEU 17:13 and all the people shall hear, and dread, that no man from thenceforth swell with pride.
DEU 17:14 When thou hast entered into the land, which thy Lord God shall give to thee, and wieldest it, and dwellest therein, and sayest, I shall ordain a king on me, as all nations by compass have;
DEU 17:15 thou shalt ordain him, whom thy Lord God chooseth, of the number of thy brethren. Thou shalt not be able to make king a man of another folk, which man is not thy brother.
DEU 17:16 And when the king is ordained, he shall not multiply horses to him, neither he shall lead again the people into Egypt, neither he shall be raised into pride, or tyranny, by the number of knights, mostly since the Lord commanded to you, that ye turn no more again by the same way.
DEU 17:17 The king shall not have many wives, that draw his mind to lusts, neither he shall have great weights of silver and of gold.
DEU 17:18 Forsooth after that he hath set in the throne of his realm, he shall write to himself, that is, shall make to be written, the deuteronomy, that is, declaration, of this law in a book, and he shall take exemplar of priests of the kin of Levi;
DEU 17:19 and he shall have it with him, and he shall read it in all the days of his life, that he learn to dread his Lord God, and to keep his words and his ceremonies, that be commanded in the law;
DEU 17:20 neither his heart be raised into pride on his brethren, neither bow he into the right side, either left side, that he reign long time, he and his sons on Israel.
DEU 18:1 Priests and deacons [[or Levites]], and all men that be of the same lineage, shall have no part and heritage with the tother people of Israel, for they shall eat the sacrifices of the Lord, and the offerings of him;
DEU 18:2 and they shall not take any other thing of the possession of their brethren; for the Lord himself is their heritage, as he spake to them.
DEU 18:3 This shall be the doom of priests, that is, the thing justly given, either granted, of the people, and of them that offer sacrifices; whether they offer an ox, either a sheep, they shall give to the priest the shoulder, and the paunch,
DEU 18:4 the first fruits of wheat, and of wine, and of oil, and a part of wools of the shearing of sheep.
DEU 18:5 For thy Lord God hath chosen him of all thy lineages, that he stand and minister to the name of the Lord, he and his sons, without end.
DEU 18:6 If a deacon [[or Levite]] goeth out of one of thy cities of all Israel, in which he dwelleth, and will come and desireth the place which the Lord choose,
DEU 18:7 he shall minister in the name of his Lord God, as all his brethren deacons [[or Levites]], that shall stand in that time before the Lord.
DEU 18:8 He shall take the same part of meats, that also other deacons shall take; besides that that is due to him in his city, by succession, either heritage, of father.
DEU 18:9 When thou hast entered into the land which thy Lord God shall give to thee, be thou ware lest thou wilt pursue [[or follow]] the abominations of those folks;
DEU 18:10 none be found in thee that cleanseth his son, either his daughter, and leadeth by the fire, either that asketh questions of diviners that divine about the altars, and that taketh heed to dreams, and chittering of birds; neither any witch be,
DEU 18:11 neither any enchanter or tregetour, that is, he who deceiveth men’s eyes so that a thing seem that which it is not; neither a man take counsel of them that have a fiend speaking within them, neither of false diviners, neither seek of dead men the truth.
DEU 18:12 For the Lord hath abomination of all these things, and for such wicked-nesses he shall do away them in thine entering.
DEU 18:13 Thou shalt be perfect, and without filth, with thy Lord God.
DEU 18:14 These heathen men, whose land thou shalt wield, hear them that work by chittering of birds, and false diviners; but thou art taught in other manner of thy Lord God.
DEU 18:15 Thy Lord God shall raise a prophet of thy folk, and of thy brethren, as me, to thee, thou shalt hear him;
DEU 18:16 as thou askedest of thy Lord God in Horeb, when the company was gathered together, and thou saidest, I shall no more hear the voice of my Lord God, and I shall no more see this greatest fire, lest I die.
DEU 18:17 And the Lord said to me, They have spoken well all things.
DEU 18:18 I shall raise to them a prophet, like thee, of the midst of their brethren, and I shall put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak to them all things, which I shall command to him.
DEU 18:19 And I shall be avenger of him, that will not hear his words, which he shall speak in my name.
DEU 18:20 Soothly a prophet shall be slain, which is depraved with pride, and will speak in my name those things, which I commanded not to him, that he should say, either by the name of alien gods.
DEU 18:21 That if thou answerest by privy thought, How may I understand the word, which the Lord spake not?
DEU 18:22 thou shalt have this sign, or token, if that that that prophet saith before in the name of the Lord, cometh not, the Lord spake it not, but he feigned it through pride of his soul, and there-fore thou shalt not dread him.
DEU 19:1 When thy Lord God hath destroyed the folks, whose land he shall give to thee, and thou hast wielded it, and hast dwelled in the cities, and in [[the]] houses thereof;
DEU 19:2 thou shalt separate three cities to thee in the midst of the land, which thy Lord God shall give to thee into possession.
DEU 19:3 Thou shalt make ready diligently the way, and thou shalt part evenly into three parts all the provinces of thy land, that he that is exiled for manslaying, have nigh hand whither he may escape.
DEU 19:4 This shall be the law of a man-slayer fleeing, whose life shall be kept. If a man smiteth unwittingly his neighbour, and which is proved to have not had any hatred against him yesterday, and the third day ago,
DEU 19:5 but to have gone simply with him into the wood to hew down trees, and in the felling down of trees the ax flieth from his hand, and the iron slideth from the helve, and smiteth, and slayeth his friend; this man shall flee to one of the foresaid cities, and shall live;
DEU 19:6 lest peradventure the next kinsman of him, whose blood is shed out, be pricked with sorrow, and pursue, and take him, if the way is longer, and slay his life, that is not guilty of death; for it is showed that he had not any hatred before against him that is slain.
DEU 19:7 Therefore I command to thee, that thou separate three cities of even space betwixt themselves.
DEU 19:8 Forsooth when thy Lord God hath alarged thy terms, as he swore to thy fathers, and hath given to thee all the land which he promised to them;
DEU 19:9 if nevertheless thou keepest his commandments, and doest those things which I command to thee today, that thou love thy Lord God, and go in his ways in all time, thou shalt add to thee three other cities, and thou shalt double the number of the foresaid cities,
DEU 19:10 that guiltless blood be not shed out in the midst of the land which thy Lord God shall give to thee to have in possession, lest thou be guilty of blood.
DEU 19:11 Forsooth if any man hateth his neighbour, and setteth ambushes to his life, and riseth up against him privily, and smiteth him, and he is dead, and the manslayer fleeth to one of the foresaid cities,
DEU 19:12 the elder men of that city shall send, and take him from the place of refuge; and they shall betake him into the hand of the next kinsman of him, whose blood is shed out, and he shall die,
DEU 19:13 and thou shalt not have mercy upon him; and thou shalt do away guilty blood from Israel, that it be well to thee.
DEU 19:14 Thou shalt not take, and turn over, the terms of thy neighbour, which the former men set in thy possession, which thy Lord God shall give to thee in the land, which land thou shalt take to be wielded.
DEU 19:15 One witness shall not stand against any man, whatever thing it is of sin, and of wickedness; but each word shall stand in the mouth of twain [[or two]], either of three witnesses.
DEU 19:16 If a false witness standeth against a man, and accuseth him of breaking of the law,
DEU 19:17 both they, of whom the cause is, shall stand before the Lord, in the sight of priests, and of judges, that be in those days.
DEU 19:18 And when they seeking the cause most diligently, have found that the false witness said a lie against his brother,
DEU 19:19 they shall yield to him, as he thought to have done to his brother; and thou shalt do away evil from the midst of thee,
DEU 19:20 that other men hear, and have dread, and be no more hardy to do such things. Thou shalt not have mercy on him,
DEU 19:21 but thou shalt ask life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
DEU 20:1 If thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and thou seest a multitude of knights, and of chariots, and a greater multitude of the adversary’s host than thou hast, thou shalt not dread them; for thy Lord God is with thee, that led thee out of the land of Egypt.
DEU 20:2 Soothly when the battle nigheth now, the priest shall stand before the battle array, and thus he shall speak to the people,
DEU 20:3 Thou, Israel, hear today, ye have battle against your enemies; your heart dread not, be ye not afeared; do not ye give stead, dread ye not them;
DEU 20:4 for your Lord God is in the midst of you, and he shall fight for you against your adversaries, that he deliver you from peril.
DEU 20:5 But the leaders shall cry by all the companies, while the host shall hear, Who is the man that hath builded a new house, and hath hallowed not it? go he and turn again into his house, lest peradventure he die in battle, and another man hallow it.
DEU 20:6 Who is the man that planted a vinery [[or vine]], and hath not yet made it to be common, and of which it is leaveful to all men to eat? go he, and turn again into his house, lest peradventure he die in battle, and another man be set in his office.
DEU 20:7 Who is the man that hath espoused a wife, and hath not taken her by fleshly knowing? go he, and turn again into his house, lest peradventure he die in battle, and another man take her.
DEU 20:8 When these things be said, the leaders of the host shall add to other things, and they shall speak to the people, and say, Who is a fearful man, and of dreadful heart? go he, and turn again into his house, lest he make his brethren’s hearts to dread, as he is aghast by dread.
DEU 20:9 And when the dukes of the host be still, and have made end of speaking, each chieftain of thy host shall make ready his companies to battle.
DEU 20:10 If any time thou shalt go to a city to overcome it, first thou shalt proffer peace to it.
DEU 20:11 If the city receiveth thy peace, and openeth to thee the gates, all the people that is therein shall be saved, and it shall serve thee under tribute.
DEU 20:12 But if they will not make bond of peace with thee, and begin battle against thee, thou shalt fight against it.
DEU 20:13 And when thy Lord God hath betaken it in thine hands, thou shalt smite by the sharpness of sword all thing of male kind that is therein,
DEU 20:14 without women, and young chil-dren, beasts, and other things that be in the city. Thou shalt part all the prey to the host, and thou shalt eat of the spoils of thine enemies, which spoils thy Lord God hath given to thee.
DEU 20:15 Thus thou shalt do to all the cities, that be full far from thee, and be not of these cities which thou shalt take into possession.
DEU 20:16 But of these cities that shall be given to thee, thou shalt not suffer any to live, but thou shalt slay by the sharpness of sword;
DEU 20:17 that is to say, Hittites, and Amorites, and Canaanites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites, as thy Lord God hath commanded to thee;
DEU 20:18 lest peradventure they teach you to do all the abominations, which they have wrought to their gods, and ye do sin against your Lord God.
DEU 20:19 When thou hast besieged a city by long time, and thou hast compassed it with strongholds that thou overcome it, thou shalt not cut down the trees, of which men may eat/of which fruit may be eaten, neither thou shalt waste the country about with axes; for it is a tree, and not a man, neither it may increase the number of fighters against thee.
DEU 20:20 And if any of them be not apple trees, but be wild, and able into other uses, cut them down, and make of them engines, till thou take the city that fighteth against thee.
DEU 21:1 When the carrion of a man slain is found in the land which thy Lord God shall give to thee, and he that is guilty of his death is unknown,
DEU 21:2 the greater men in birth and thy judges shall go out, and they shall mete from the place of the carrion the spaces of all the cities about;
DEU 21:3 and which city they see to be nearer that carrion, than another, the elder men of that city shall take of [[the]] drove a cow calf, that hath not drawn yoke, neither hath cut the earth with a ploughshare;
DEU 21:4 and they shall lead that cow calf to a sharp stony valley, that was never eared, nor received seed; and in that valley they shall cut the head off the cow calf.
DEU 21:5 And the priests, the sons of Levi, shall nigh, which thy Lord God chose, that they minister to him, and bless in his name, and all the cause shall hang at their word; and whatever thing is clean either unclean, be it deemed by them.
DEU 21:6 And the greater men in birth of that city shall come to the slain man, and they shall wash their hands on the cow calf, that was slain in the valley;
DEU 21:7 and they shall say, Our hands shed not out this blood, neither our eyes have seen who shed it.
DEU 21:8 Lord, be merciful to thy people Israel, whom thou hast again-bought, and areckon thou not innocent blood in the midst of thy people Israel. And the guilt of blood shall be done away from them.
DEU 21:9 Forsooth thou shalt be alien, or unguilty, from the blood of the innocent which is shed, when thou hast done that that the Lord commanded.
DEU 21:10 If thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, that thy Lord God betaketh them in thine hand, and thou leadest prisoners,
DEU 21:11 and thou seest in the number of those prisoners a fair woman, and thou lovest her, and will have her to wife,
DEU 21:12 thou shalt bring her into thine house; which woman shall shave her hair, and she shall cut her nails about,
DEU 21:13 and she shall put away the cloth, wherein she was taken, and she shall sit in thine house, and she shall beweep her father and her mother by a month; and afterward thou shalt enter to her, and thou shalt sleep with her, and she shall be thy wife.
DEU 21:14 But if afterward she sitteth not in thy soul, that is, pleaseth not thy will, thou shalt deliver her free, neither thou shalt be able to sell her for money, neither oppress by power, for thou madest her low.
DEU 21:15 If a man hath two wives, one loved, and another hateful, and he begetteth of her free children, and the son of the odious wife is the first begotten,
DEU 21:16 and the father will part his chattel [[or substance]] betwixt his sons, he shall not be able to make the son of the loved wife his first begotten son, and set [[or put]] him before the son of the hateful wife,
DEU 21:17 but he shall know the son of the hateful wife to be his first begotten son, and he shall give to that son all things double of those things that he hath; for this son is the beginning of his free children, and the first engendered things be due to him.
DEU 21:18 If a man beget a son rebel, and a froward, that heareth not the behest of his father and mother, and he is chastised, and despiseth to obey to them,
DEU 21:19 they shall take him, and lead him to the elder men of that city, and to the gate of doom;
DEU 21:20 and they shall say to them, This our son is overthwart, and rebel; he despiseth to hear our behests, or admonishings, he giveth attention to gluttonies, and to lechery, and to feasts.
DEU 21:21 The people of the city shall oppress him with stones, and he shall die, that ye do away evil from the midst of you, and that all Israel hear it, and dread.
DEU 21:22 When a man doeth a sin which is worthy to be punished by death, and he is deemed to death, and is hanged in a gibbet,
DEU 21:23 his carrion shall not dwell in the tree, but it shall be buried in the same day; for he that hangeth in the tree or in the cross is cursed of God, and thou shalt not defoul thy land which thy Lord God gave thee into possession.
DEU 22:1 Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ox, either sheep, erring or wandering, and shalt pass thereby, but thou shalt bring it again to thy brother.
DEU 22:2 And if thy brother is not nigh, neither thou knowest him, thou shalt lead those beasts into thine house, and those [[or they]] shall be with thee, as long as thy brother seeketh them, and till he receive them.
DEU 22:3 In like manner thou shalt do of thy brother’s ass, and of his cloth, and of each thing of thy brother, that was lost; if thou findest it, be thou not negligent, as of an alien thing.
DEU 22:4 If thou seest that the ass, either the ox, of thy brother hath fallen in the way, thou shalt not despise, but thou shalt raise with him.
DEU 22:5 A woman shall not be clothed in a man’s clothes, neither a man shall use a woman’s clothes; for he that doeth these things is abominable before God.
DEU 22:6 If thou goest in the way, and findest a bird’s nest in a tree, either in the earth, and findest the mother sitting on the birds, either [[the]] eggs, thou shalt not hold the mother with the children,
DEU 22:7 but thou shalt suffer the mother[[to]] go, and shalt hold the sons taken, that it be well to thee, and that thou live in long time.
DEU 22:8 When thou buildest a new house, thou shalt make a wall of the roof by compass, lest blood be shed out in thine house, and thou be guilty, if another man slideth, and falleth into a ditch.
DEU 22:9 Thou shalt not sow thy vinery [[or vineyard]] with another seed, lest both the seed which thou hast sown, and those things that come forth of the vinery [[or vineyard]], that is, the fruit of the vinery, be defouled together.
DEU 22:10 Thou shalt not ear with an ox and an ass together.
DEU 22:11 Thou shalt not be clothed in a cloth, which is woven together of wool and of flax.
DEU 22:12 Thou shalt make little cords by four corners in the hems of thy mantle, with which thou art covered.
DEU 22:13 If a man weddeth a wife, and afterward hateth her,
DEU 22:14 and seeketh occasions by which he may leave her, and he putteth against her the worst name, and saith, I have taken this wife, and I have entered to her, and I found not her a virgin;
DEU 22:15 the father and mother of her shall take her, and they shall bear with them the tokens of her virginity to the elder men of the city, that be in the gate;
DEU 22:16 and her father shall say, I gave my daughter wife to this man, and for he hateth her,
DEU 22:17 he putteth to her the worst name, that he saith, I found not thy daughter a virgin; and lo! these be the tokens of the virginity of my daughter; they shall spread forth a cloth before the elder men of the city.
DEU 22:18 And the elder men of that city shall take the man, and shall beat him,
DEU 22:19 and furthermore they shall con-demn him in an hundred shekels of silver, which he shall give to the father of the damsel, for he defamed her by the worst name that may be upon a virgin of Israel; and he shall have her to wife, and he shall not be able to forsake her, in all his lifetime.
DEU 22:20 That if it is found sooth, that he putteth against her, and virginity is not found in the damsel,
DEU 22:21 they shall cast her out of her father’s gates; and men of that city shall oppress her with stones, and she shall die, for she did [[an]] unleaveful thing in Israel, that she did lechery in her father’s house; and so thou shalt do away evil from the midst of thee.
DEU 22:22 If a man sleepeth with the wife of another man, ever either shall die, that is, the adulterer, and the adulteress; and thus thou shalt do away evil from Israel.
DEU 22:23 If a man espouseth a damsel virgin [[or a woman maiden]], and another man findeth her in the city, and doeth lechery with her,
DEU 22:24 thou shalt lead ever either to the gate of that city, and they shall be killed with stones; the damsel shall be stoned, for she cried not, when she was in the city; the man shall be stoned, for he defouled his neighbour’s wife; and thus thou shalt do away evil from the midst of thee.
DEU 22:25 But if a man findeth in the field a damsel, which is espoused, and he taketh her, and doeth lechery with her, he alone shall die;
DEU 22:26 the damsel shall suffer nothing of evil, neither is guilty of death; for as a thief riseth against his brother, and slayeth him, so and the damsel suffered;
DEU 22:27 she was alone in the field, she cried, and none was present, that should deliver her.
DEU 22:28 If a man findeth a damsel virgin [[or a woman maiden]], that hath no spouse, and taketh, and doeth lechery with her, and the thing cometh to the doom,
DEU 22:29 he that slept with her shall give to the father of the damsel fifty shekels of silver, and he shall have her to wife, for he made her low; he shall not be able to forsake her, in all the days of his life.
DEU 22:30 A man shall not take his father’s wife, neither he shall show her privates.
DEU 23:1 A gelding when his stones be broken, either cut away, and his rod cut off, he shall not enter into the church of the Lord.
DEU 23:2 A child born of whoredom shall not enter into the church of the Lord, unto the tenth generation.
DEU 23:3 Ammonites and Moabites, yea after the tenth generation, shall not enter into the church of the Lord without end;
DEU 23:4 for they would not come to you with bread and water in the way, when ye went out of Egypt; and for they hired against thee Balaam, the son of Beor, of Mesopotamia of Syria, that he should curse thee;
DEU 23:5 and thy Lord God would not hear Balaam, and God turned his curse into thy blessing, for he loved thee.
DEU 23:6 Thou shalt not make peace with them, neither thou shalt seek good things to them, in all the days of thy life into without end.
DEU 23:7 Thou shalt not loathe a man of Idumea, for he is thy brother, neither of a man of Egypt, for thou were a comeling in the land of him.
DEU 23:8 They that be born of them, shall enter in the third generation into the church of the Lord.
DEU 23:9 When thou shalt go out into battle against thine enemies, thou shalt keep thee from all evil thing.
DEU 23:10 If a man is among you, that is defouled in his night sleep, he shall go out of your tents; and he shall not turn again
DEU 23:11 before that he be washed in water at the eventide, and after the going down of the sun, he shall turn again into the tents.
DEU 23:12 Thou shalt have a place without the tents, to which thou shalt go out to do the needful things of mankind;
DEU 23:13 and thou shalt bear a little stake in thy girdle; and when thou hast set, thou shalt dig about, and thou shalt cover with earth things voided out, where thou art relieved.
DEU 23:14 For thy Lord God goeth in midst of the tents, that he deliver thee, and betake thine enemies to thee, that thy tents be holy, and nothing of filth appear in them, lest for uncleanness he forsake thee.
DEU 23:15 Thou shalt not take a servant to his lord, which fleeth to thee;
DEU 23:16 he shall dwell with thee in the place that pleaseth him, and he shall abide in one of thy cities; and make thou not him sorry, or heavy.
DEU 23:17 None whore/No strumpet shall be of the daughters of Israel, neither a lecher of the sons of Israel.
DEU 23:18 Thou shalt not offer the hire of an whorehouse, neither the price of a dog, in the house of thy Lord God, whatever thing it is that thou hast avowed; for ever either is abomination before thy Lord God.
DEU 23:19 Thou shalt not lend to thy brother to usury, money, neither fruits, neither any other thing,
DEU 23:20 but to an alien. For thou shalt lend to thy brother without usury that that he needeth, that thy Lord God bless thee in all thy work in the land to which thou shalt enter to wield.
DEU 23:21 When thou makest a vow to thy Lord God, thou shalt not tarry to yield it, for thy Lord God shall ask that of thee; and if thou tarriest, it shall be reckoned to thee into sin.
DEU 23:22 If thou wilt not promise, thou shalt be without sin.
DEU 23:23 Forsooth thou shalt keep, and do that that went out once of thy lips, as thou promisedest to thy Lord God, and hast spoken with thine own will and thy mouth.
DEU 23:24 If thou enterest into the vineyard of thy neighbour, eat thou grapes, as much as [[it]] pleaseth thee; but bear thou none out with thee.
DEU 23:25 If thou enterest into the corn field of thy friend, thou shalt break off the ears of the corn, and rub them together with thine hands; but thou shalt not reap them with a sickle.
DEU 24:1 If a man taketh a wife, and hath her, and she findeth not grace before his eyes for some vileness, or unclean-ness, he shall write a little book of forsaking, and he shall give it in her hand, and he shall deliver her from his house.
DEU 24:2 And when she goeth out from him, and weddeth another husband,
DEU 24:3 and he also hateth her, and giveth to her a little book of forsaking, and delivereth her from his house, either certainly he is dead,
DEU 24:4 the former husband shall not be able to receive her again into wife, for she is defouled, and made abominable before the Lord; lest thou make thy land to do sin, which thy Lord God hath given thee to wield.
DEU 24:5 When a man hath taken late a wife, he shall not go forth to battle, neither anything of the common needs shall be enjoined to him, but he shall give attention without blame to his household, that he be glad in one year with his wife.
DEU 24:6 Thou shalt not take instead of a wed the lower and the higher quern-stone of thy brother, for he hath put his life to thee.
DEU 24:7 If a man is taken, that is, convicted in doom, busily ambushing to steal his brother of the sons of Israel, and when he hath sold him, taketh price, he shall be slain; and thus thou shalt do away evil from the midst of thee.
DEU 24:8 Keep thou diligently, lest thou run into the sickness of leprosy, but thou shalt do whatever things that the priests of the kin of Levi teach thee, by that that I commanded to them, and fulfill thou it diligently.
DEU 24:9 Have ye mind what things your Lord God did to Marie, in the way, when ye went out of Egypt.
DEU 24:10 When thou shalt ask of thy neighbour anything that he oweth to thee, thou shalt not enter into his house, that thou take away from him a wed;
DEU 24:11 but thou shalt stand withoutforth, and he shall bring forth to thee that that he hath.
DEU 24:12 And if he is poor, his wed shall not abide by night with thee,
DEU 24:13 but anon thou shalt yield his wed to him before the going down of the sun, that he sleep in his cloth, and bless thee, and thou have rightwise-ness before thy Lord God.
DEU 24:14 Thou shalt not deny the hire of thy brother needy and poor, either of the comeling that dwelleth with thee in thy land, and is within thy gates;
DEU 24:15 but in the same day thou shalt yield to him the price of his travail, before the going down of the sun, for he is poor, and sustaineth thereof his life; lest he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be reckoned to thee into sin.
DEU 24:16 The fathers shall not be slain for the sons, neither the sons for the fathers, but each man shall die for his own sin.
DEU 24:17 Thou shalt not waywardly turn, or mis-deem, the doom of the comeling, or of the fatherless, either motherless child; neither thou shalt take away instead of a wed the cloth of a widow.
DEU 24:18 Have thou mind, that thou servedest in Egypt, and thy Lord God delivered thee from thence; therefore I command to thee that thou do this thing.
DEU 24:19 When thou reapest corn in thy field, and forgettest, and leavest a reap, thou shalt not turn again to take it, but thou shalt suffer that a comeling, and a fatherless, either motherless child, and a widow take it away, that thy Lord God bless thee in all the work of thine hands.
DEU 24:20 If thou gatherest the fruits of olives, whatever thing leaveth in the trees, thou shalt not turn again to gather it, but thou shalt leave it to a comeling, a fatherless, either motherless [[child]], and to a widow.
DEU 24:21 If thou gatherest grapes of thy vinery [[or vine]], thou shalt not gather [[the]] raisins that leave or be left, but those [[or they]] shall fall into the uses of the comeling, of the fatherless, either motherless [[child]], and of the widow.
DEU 24:22 Have thou mind, that also thou servedest in Egypt, and therefore I command to thee, that thou do this thing.
DEU 25:1 If a cause is betwixt any men, and they ask judges, they shall give the victory of rightwiseness to him, whom they perceive to be just [[or rightwise]], and they shall condemn him of wicked-ness, whom they perceive to be wicked.
DEU 25:2 And if they see him that hath sinned, worthy of beatings, they shall cast him down, and they shall make him to be beaten before them; and the manner of the beatings shall be for the measure of the sin,
DEU 25:3 so only that they pass not the number of forty strokes, lest thy brother be rent vilely before thine eyes, and go then away.
DEU 25:4 Thou shalt not bind the mouth of the ox treading thy fruits in the corn-floor.
DEU 25:5 When brethren dwell together, and one of them is dead without free children, the wife of the dead brother shall not be wedded to another man, but his brother shall take her, and he shall raise the seed of his brother.
DEU 25:6 And he shall call her first begotten son by his name, that is, of the dead brother, that his name be not done away from Israel.
DEU 25:7 And if he will not take the wife of his brother, which is due to him by law, the woman shall go to the gate of the city; and she shall ask the greater men in birth, and she shall say to them, My husband’s brother will not raise the seed of his brother in Israel, neither he will take me into marriage.
DEU 25:8 And anon they shall make him to be called, and they shall ask him. If he answer, and say, I will not take her to wife;
DEU 25:9 the woman shall go to him before the elder men of Israel, and she shall take his shoe off from his foot, and she shall spit into his face, and she shall say to them, Thus it shall be done to the man, that buildeth not his brother’s house;
DEU 25:10 and his name shall be called in Israel, The house of the man unshod.
DEU 25:11 If two men have strife betwixt themselves, and one beginneth to strive against another, and the wife of the one man will deliver her husband from the hand of the stronger man, and she putteth forth her hand, and holdeth him by his privy members,
DEU 25:12 thou shalt cut off her hand, neither thou shalt be bowed on her with any mercy.
DEU 25:13 Thou shalt not have in thy bag diverse weights, a greater to buy with, and a lesser to sell with,
DEU 25:14 neither a bushel more and a bushel less shall be in thine house.
DEU 25:15 Thou shalt have a just weight and true, and an even bushel and true shall be to thee, that thou live in much time on the land which thy Lord God shall give to thee.
DEU 25:16 For the Lord shall have him abominable that doeth these things, and he loatheth, either curseth, all unrightfulness [[or unrightwiseness]].
DEU 25:17 Have mind what things Amalek did to thee in the way, when thou wentest out of Egypt;
DEU 25:18 how he came to thee, and killed the last men of thine host, that sat behind weary, when thou were dis-eased with hunger and travail, and he dreaded not God.
DEU 25:19 Therefore when thy Lord God hath given rest to thee, and hath made subject to thee all nations about, in the land that he promised to thee, thou shalt do away Amalek’s name from under heaven; be thou ware lest thou forget this.
DEU 26:1 And when thou hast entered into the land which thy Lord God shall give to thee to wield, and thou hast gotten it, and hast dwelled therein,
DEU 26:2 thou shalt take the first fruits of all thy fruits, and thou shalt put them in a basket; and thou shalt go to the place which thy Lord God choose, that his name be inwardly called there.
DEU 26:3 And thou shalt go to the priest, that shall be in those days, and thou shalt say to him, I acknowledge today before thy Lord God, that I have entered into the land, which he swore to our fathers, that he should give it to us.
DEU 26:4 And the priest shall take the basket of thine hand, and he shall set [[or put]] it before the altar of thy Lord God.
DEU 26:5 And thou shalt say in the sight of thy Lord God, Syrian pursued my father, that went down into Egypt, and was a pilgrim there in fewest number; and he increased into a great folk, and strong, and of multitude without number.
DEU 26:6 And [[the]] Egyptians tormented us, and pursued us, and they putted upon us most grievous burdens.
DEU 26:7 And we cried to the Lord God of our fathers, which heard us, and he beheld our meekness, and our travail, and our anguish;
DEU 26:8 and he led us out of Egypt in a mighty hand, and in an arm stretched out, in great dread, and in miracles, and in great wonders,
DEU 26:9 and he led us into this place; and he hath given to us a land flowing with milk and honey.
DEU 26:10 And therefore I offer now to thee the first fruits of the fruits of the land which, the Lord, gave to me. And thou shalt leave them in the sight of thy Lord God. And when thy Lord God is worshipped,
DEU 26:11 thou shalt eat in all the goods which thy Lord God gave to thee, and to thine house, thou, and the deacon [[or Levite]], and the comeling that is with thee.
DEU 26:12 When thou hast fulfilled the tithe of all thy fruits, in the third year of thy tithes, thou shalt give to the deacon [[or Levite]], and to the comeling, and to the fatherless, either the motherless child, and to the widow, that they eat within thy gates, and be full-filled.
DEU 26:13 And thou shalt speak in the sight of thy Lord God, and say, I have taken away that that is hallowed of mine house, and I gave it to the deacon [[or Levite]], and to the comeling, and to the fatherless, either motherless child, and to the widow, as thou command-edest to me; I passed not by thy commandments, I forgot not thy behest or thy bidding.
DEU 26:14 I ate not of those things in my mourning, neither I separated them in any uncleanness, neither I spended of those [[or them]] anything in burying of a dead body. I obeyed to the voice of my Lord God, and I did all things as thou commandedest to me.
DEU 26:15 Behold thou from thy saintuary, from the high dwelling place of heaven, and bless thou thy people Israel, and the land which thou hast given to us, as thou hast sworn to our fathers, the land flowing with milk and honey.
DEU 26:16 Today Israel, thy Lord God commanded to thee, that thou do these behests and dooms, that thou keep and fulfill them of all thine heart, and of all thy soul.
DEU 26:17 Thou hast chosen the Lord today, that he be God to thee, and that thou go in his ways, and that thou keep his ceremonies, and his behests, and his dooms, and obey to his commandment or his bidding.
DEU 26:18 Lo! the Lord hath chosen thee today, that thou be a special people to him, as he hath spoken to thee, and that thou keep all his commandments;
DEU 26:19 and he shall make thee higher than all folks, which he made into his praising, and name, and glory; that thou be an holy people to thy Lord God, as he hath spoken to thee.
DEU 27:1 And Moses commanded, and the elder men, to the people of Israel, and said, Keep ye each commandment which I command to you today.
DEU 27:2 And when ye have passed over Jordan, into the land which thy Lord God shall give to thee, thou shalt raise great stones, and thou shalt make them plane with chalk,
DEU 27:3 that thou may write in them all the words of this law, when Jordan is passed over, that thou enter into the land which thy Lord God shall give to thee, the land flowing with milk and honey, as he promised to thy fathers.
DEU 27:4 Therefore when thou hast passed over Jordan, raise thou up the stones which I command today to thee, in the hill [[or mount]] of Ebal; and thou shalt make them plane with chalk.
DEU 27:5 And there thou shalt build an altar to thy Lord God, of stones which iron touched not,
DEU 27:6 and of stones unformed and un-polished; and thou shalt offer thereon burnt sacrifices to thy Lord God;
DEU 27:7 and thou shalt offer peaceable sacrifices, and thou shalt eat there, and thou shalt make feast before thy Lord God.
DEU 27:8 And thou shalt write plainly and clearly on the stones all the words of this law.
DEU 27:9 And Moses and the priests of the kindred of Levi said to all Israel, Israel, take heed thou, and hear; today thou art made the people of thy Lord God;
DEU 27:10 thou shalt hear his voice, and thou shalt do the commandments, and his rightwisenesses, which I command to thee today.
DEU 27:11 And Moses commanded to the people in that day, and said,
DEU 27:12 These men shall stand upon the hill of Gerizim to bless the Lord, when Jordan they have over-passed; Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin.
DEU 27:13 And even against, these men shall stand in the hill of Ebal to curse; Reuben, Gad, and Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.
DEU 27:14 And the deacons [[or Levites]] shall pronounce, and shall say with high voice to all the men of Israel,
DEU 27:15 Cursed is the man that maketh a graven image and molten, abomination of the Lord, the work of the hands of craftsmen, and shall set it in a privy place; and all the people shall answer, and say, Amen!
DEU 27:16 He is cursed that honoureth not, or despiseth, his father and mother; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 27:17 Cursed is he that over-beareth, or undoeth, the terms of his neighbour; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 27:18 Cursed is he that maketh a blind man to err in the way; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 27:19 He is cursed that perverteth the doom of a comeling, of a fatherless, either motherless child, and of a widow; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 27:20 Cursed is that sleepeth with his father’s wife, and showeth the privates of his bed; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 27:21 Cursed is he that sleepeth with any beast; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 27:22 Cursed is he that sleepeth with his sister, the daughter of his father, either of his mother; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 27:23 Cursed is he that sleepeth with his wife’s mother; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 27:24 Cursed is he that slayeth privily his neighbour; and all the people shall say, Amen! Cursed is he that sleepeth with his neighbour’s wife; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 27:25 Cursed is he that taketh gifts, that he smite the life of innocent blood; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 27:26 Cursed is he that abideth not in the words of this law, neither fulfilleth them in work; and all the people shall say, Amen!
DEU 28:1 Forsooth if thou hearest the voice of thy Lord God, that thou do and keep all his commandments, which I command to thee today, thy Lord God shall make thee higher than all folks that live in earth.
DEU 28:2 And all these blessings shall come [[up]] on thee, and shall take thee; if nevertheless thou hearest his behests.
DEU 28:3 Thou shalt be blessed in [[the]] city, and blessed in the field;
DEU 28:4 blessed shall be the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, and the fruit of thy beasts, the flocks of thy great beasts, and the folds of thy sheep;
DEU 28:5 blessed shall be thy barns, and blessed shall be thy remnants;
DEU 28:6 thou shalt be blessed entering in, and going out.
DEU 28:7 The Lord shall give thine enemies to fall in thy sight, that shall rise against thee; by one way they shall come against thee, and by seven ways they shall flee from thy face.
DEU 28:8 The Lord shall send out blessings upon thy cellars, and upon all the works of thine hands; and he shall bless thee in the land which thou hast taken.
DEU 28:9 The Lord shall raise thee to him-self into an holy people, as he swore to thee, if thou keepest the behests of thy Lord God, and goest in his ways.
DEU 28:10 And all the peoples of other lands shall see, that the name of the Lord is inwardly called upon thee, and they shall dread thee.
DEU 28:11 The Lord shall make thee to be plenteous in all goods, in the fruit of thy womb, and in the fruit of thy beasts, in the fruit of thy land, which the Lord swore to thy fathers, that he would give to thee.
DEU 28:12 The Lord shall open his best treasure, heaven, that he give rain to thy land in his time; and he shall bless all the works of thine hands; and thou shalt lend to many folks, and of no man thou shalt take borrowing.
DEU 28:13 The Lord God shall set thee into the head, and not into the tail, and ever[[more]] thou shalt be above, and not beneath; if nevertheless thou hearest the commandments of thy Lord God, which I command to thee today, and keepest, and doest them,
DEU 28:14 and bowest not away from them, neither to the right side, neither to the left side, neither pursuest [[or followed]] alien gods, nor worshippest them.
DEU 28:15 That if thou wilt not hear the voice of thy Lord God, that thou keep and do all his behests, and ceremonies, which I command to thee today, all these cursings shall come upon thee, and shall take thee.
DEU 28:16 Thou shalt be cursed in city, and cursed in field.
DEU 28:17 Cursed shall be thy barn, and cursed shall be thy remnants.
DEU 28:18 Cursed shall be the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, the droves of thine oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep.
DEU 28:19 Thou shalt be cursed going in, and cursed going out.
DEU 28:20 The Lord shall send upon thee hunger, and thirst, and blaming, into all the works which thou shalt do, till he all-break thee, and lose thee swiftly, for thy full wicked findings, in which thou hast forsaken me.
DEU 28:21 The Lord shall join pestilence to thee, till he waste thee from the land, to which thou shalt enter to wield.
DEU 28:22 The Lord shall smite thee with neediness, with fever, and cold, with burning, and heat, with corrupt air, and mildew, either rust; and he shall pursue thee till thou perish.
DEU 28:23 Heaven, that is above thee, be it brazen; and the earth, that thou tread-est on, be it iron.
DEU 28:24 The Lord give dust for rain to thy land, and ash come down from heaven upon thee, till thou be all-broken.
DEU 28:25 The Lord give thee falling before thine enemies; by one way go thou [[out]] against them, and by seven ways flee thou from them, and be thou scattered by all the realms of [[the]] earth;
DEU 28:26 and thy dead body be it into meat to all birds of heaven, and to beasts of the earth, and none be that may drive them away.
DEU 28:27 The Lord smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and the Lord smite the part of body whereby ordures, or turds, be voided out; also the Lord smite thee with scab, and itching, so that thou mayest not be cured.
DEU 28:28 The Lord smite thee with madness, and blindness, and wildness of thought;
DEU 28:29 and grope thou in midday, as a blind man is wont to grope in dark-nesses; and dress he not thy ways; in all time suffer thou false challenge, and be thou oppressed by violence, neither have thou any that shall deliver thee.
DEU 28:30 Take thou a wife, and another man sleep with her; build thou an house, and dwell thou not therein; plant thou a vinery [[or vine]], and gather thou not grapes thereof.
DEU 28:31 Thine ox be offered before thee, and eat thou not thereof; thine ass be ravished in thy sight, and be it not yielded again to thee; thy sheep be given to thine enemies, and none be that help thee to recover them.
DEU 28:32 Thy sons and thy daughters be given to another people, while thine eyes see, and fail at the sight of them all day; and no strength be in thine hand.
DEU 28:33 A people whom thou knowest not, eat the fruits of thy land, and all thy travails; and ever[[more]] be thou suffering false challenges, and be thou oppressed in all days, or all time,
DEU 28:34 and be thou wondering at the fearfulness of those things which thine eyes shall see.
DEU 28:35 The Lord smite thee with the worst botch in the knees, and in the hinder parts of the leg; and thou may not be healed from the sole of thy foot till to thy top or unto the noll.
DEU 28:36 And the Lord shall lead thee, and thy king, whom thou shalt ordain on thee, into a folk which thou knowest not, thou, and thy fathers; and thou shalt serve there to alien gods, to tree, and to stone.
DEU 28:37 And thou shalt be lost, or forgotten, into a proverb, and into a fable, to all peoples, to whom the Lord shall bring thee in.
DEU 28:38 Thou shalt cast much seed into the earth, and thou shalt gather again little; for locusts shall devour all things.
DEU 28:39 Thou shalt plant, and dig a vinery [[or vine]], and thou shalt not drink the wine of it, neither thou shalt gather thereof anything; for it shall be wasted with worms.
DEU 28:40 Thou shalt have olive trees in all thy coasts, and thou shalt not be anointed with oil of them; for they shall fall down, and perish.
DEU 28:41 Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, and thou shalt not use them; for they shall be led into captivity.
DEU 28:42 Rust, or mildew, shall waste all thy trees and the fruits of thy land.
DEU 28:43 A comeling, that dwelleth with thee in the land, shall go up upon thee, and he shall be the higher; forsooth thou shalt go down, and shalt be the lower.
DEU 28:44 He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him; he shall be into the head, and thou shalt be into the tail.
DEU 28:45 And all these cursings shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and take thee, till thou perish; for thou heardest not the voice of thy Lord God, neither keptest his commandments and ceremonies, which he commanded to thee.
DEU 28:46 And signs, and great wonders shall be in thee, and in thy seed, till into without end;
DEU 28:47 for thou servedest not thy Lord God in joy and gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things that God sent thee.
DEU 28:48 Thou shalt serve thine enemy, whom God shall send to thee, in hunger, and thirst, and in nakedness, and in poverty of all things; and he shall put an iron yoke on thy noll, till he all-break thee.
DEU 28:49 The Lord shall bring on thee a folk from far place, and from the last ends of [[the]] earth, into the likeness of an eagle flying with rush, of which folk thou mayest not understand their language;
DEU 28:50 a folk most greedy asker this shall be, that shall not give reverence to an eld [[or old]] man, neither have mercy upon a little child.
DEU 28:51 And it shall devour the fruit of thy beasts, and the fruits of thy land, till thou perishest, and this folk shall not leave to thee wheat, wine, and oil, nor droves of oxen, and flocks of sheep, till he lose thee,
DEU 28:52 and all-break [[thee]] in all thy cities, and till thy firm and high walls be destroyed, in which thou haddest trust in all thy land. Thou shalt be besieged within thy gates in all thy land, which thy Lord God shall give to thee.
DEU 28:53 And thou shalt eat the fruit of thy womb, and the flesh of thy sons, and of thy daughters, which thy Lord God shall give to thee, in the anguish, and in the destroying, by which thine enemies shall oppress thee.
DEU 28:54 A man delicate of life, and full lecherous, shall have envy greatly to his brother, and to his wife that lieth in his bosom, and also toward the remnant of his children, that he hath left,
DEU 28:55 lest he give to them of the flesh of his sons which he shall eat; for he hath none other thing in [[the]] besieging, and poverty, by which thine enemies shall waste thee within all thy gates.
DEU 28:56 A tender woman and delicate, that might not go upon the earth, neither set a step of [[the]] foot, for her most softness and tenderness, shall have envy to her husband that lieth in her bosom, on the flesh of her son, and daughter,
DEU 28:57 and on the filth of [[the]] skins, wherein the child is wrapped in the mother’s womb, that go out of the midst of her hip bones, or loins, and on [[the]] free children that be born in the same hour. They shall eat those children privily, for the scarcity of all things in besieging and destroying, by which thine enemy shall oppress thee within thy gates.
DEU 28:58 No but thou shalt keep and do all the words of this law, that be written in this volume, either book, and shalt dread his glorious name and fearful, that is, thy Lord God,
DEU 28:59 the Lord shall increase thy wounds, or torments, and the wounds of thy seed; great wounds and continual, sicknesses worst and everlasting.
DEU 28:60 And he shall turn into thee all the torments of Egypt, which thou dread-edest, and those [[or they]] shall cleave to thee.
DEU 28:61 Furthermore the Lord shall bring upon thee also all the sorrows and wounds, that be not written in the book of this law, till he all-break thee.
DEU 28:62 And ye shall dwell few in number, that were before as the stars of heaven for multitude, for thou heardest not the voice of thy Lord God.
DEU 28:63 And as the Lord was glad before upon you, and did well to you, and multiplied you; so he shall be glad to lose [[or scatter]] you, and to destroy you, that ye be taken away from the land, to which thou shalt enter to wield.
DEU 28:64 The Lord shall scatter thee into all peoples, from [[the]] highness of the earth unto the coasts thereof; and thou shalt serve there to alien gods, which thou knowest not, and thy fathers knew not, to trees and stones.
DEU 28:65 Also thou shalt not rest in those folks, neither rest shall be to the step of thy foot. For the Lord shall give to thee there a fearful heart, and eyes failing, and a soul wasted with privy sorrow.
DEU 28:66 And thy life shall be as hanging before thee; thou shalt dread night and day, and thou shalt not trust to thy life.
DEU 28:67 In the morrowtide thou shalt say, Who shall give the eventide to me? and in the eventide thou shalt say, Who shall give the morrowtide to me? for the dread of thine heart, by which thou shalt be made afeared, and for those things which thou shalt see with thine eyes.
DEU 28:68 The Lord shall lead thee again by ships into Egypt, by the way of which he said to thee, Thou shouldest no more see it. There thou shalt be sold to thine enemies, into menservants and womenservants; and none shall be that shall deliver thee.
DEU 29:1 These be the words of the bond of peace, which the Lord commanded to Moses, that he should make with the sons of Israel in the land of Moab, besides the bond of peace, which he covenanted with them in Horeb.
DEU 29:2 And Moses called all Israel, and said to them, Ye have seen all things which the Lord did before you in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land;
DEU 29:3 the great temptations which thine eyes have seen, those signs, and the great wonders.
DEU 29:4 And the Lord gave not to you an heart understanding, and eyes seeing, and ears that may hear, till into this present day.
DEU 29:5 He led you by forty years through desert; your clothes were not broken, neither the shoes of your feet were wasted by eldness;
DEU 29:6 ye ate not bread, neither ye drank wine and cider, that ye should know that he is your Lord God.
DEU 29:7 And ye came to this place; and Sihon, the king of Heshbon went out, and Og, the king of Bashan, and they came to us to battle. And we smote them,
DEU 29:8 and we took away their land, and we gave it to possession, to Reuben, and to Gad, and to the half lineage of Manasseh.
DEU 29:9 Therefore keep ye the words of this covenant, and fulfill ye them, that ye understand all things which ye shall do.
DEU 29:10 All ye stand today before your Lord God, your princes, and lineages, and the greater men in birth, and your teachers or doctors, all the people of Israel,
DEU 29:11 your free children, and your wives, and the comelings that dwell with thee in the tents, besides the hewers of wood, and besides they [[or them]] that bear water;
DEU 29:12 that thou go into the bond of peace of thy Lord God, and in the oath which thy Lord God smiteth with thee,
DEU 29:13 that he raise thee up into a people to himself, and that he be thy Lord God, as he spake to thee, and as he swore to thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
DEU 29:14 And not to you alone I make this bond of peace, and confirm these oaths,
DEU 29:15 but to all men, present and absent.
DEU 29:16 For ye know how we dwelled in the land of Egypt, and how we passed by the midst of nations; which ye passed,
DEU 29:17 and saw abominations and filths, that is, their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which they worshipped.
DEU 29:18 Lest peradventure among you be man either woman, meine either lineage, whose heart is turned away today from your Lord God, that he go, and serve the gods of those folks; and a root burgeoning gall and bitter-ness be among you;
DEU 29:19 and when he hath heard the words of this oath, he bless himself in his heart, and say, Peace shall be to me, and I shall go in the shrewdness of mine heart; and lest the drunken take the thirsty,
DEU 29:20 and the Lord forgive not to him, but then full greatly his strong vengeance be fierce, and his fervour burst out against that man, and all the curses that be written in this book rest upon him; and the Lord do away his name from under heaven,
DEU 29:21 and waste him into perdition from all the lineages of Israel, by the curses that be contained in the book of this law, and of the bond of peace.
DEU 29:22 And the generation pursuing [[or following]] shall see, and the sons that shall be born afterward, and pilgrims that shall come from [[a]] far, seeing the vengeances of that land, and the sick-nesses by which the Lord tormented that land,
DEU 29:23 burning that land with brimstone, and heat of the sun, so that it be no more sown, neither bring forth any green thing, into ensample of [[the]] destroying of Sodom, and Gomorrah, of Admah, and of Zeboiim, which the Lord destroyed in his wrath, and strong vengeance.
DEU 29:24 And all folks shall say, Why did the Lord so to this land? What is the great wrath of his strong vengeance?
DEU 29:25 and they shall answer, For they forsook the covenant of the Lord, which he covenanted with their fathers, when he led them out of the land of Egypt,
DEU 29:26 and they served alien gods, and worshipped them, which they knew not, and to which they were not given;
DEU 29:27 therefore the strong vengeance of the Lord was wroth against this land, that he brought in upon it all the curses that be written in this book;
DEU 29:28 and he casted them out of their land, in wrath and strong vengeance, and in full great indignation; and he casted forth them into an alien land, as it is proved today.
DEU 29:29 Diverse things be hid, or privy, of our Lord God, that is, in his before-knowing, which things be showed to us, and to our sons without end, that we do all the words of this law.
DEU 30:1 Therefore when all these come upon thee, blessing either cursing, which I have set forth in thy sight, and if thou art led by repentance of thine heart among all folks, into which thy Lord God hath scattered thee,
DEU 30:2 and if thou turnest again to him, and obeyest to his behests, as I have commanded to thee today, with thy sons, in all thine heart, and in all thy soul,
DEU 30:3 thy Lord God shall lead thee again from thy captivity, and shall have mercy on thee, and again he shall gather thee from all peoples, into which he hath scattered thee before.
DEU 30:4 If thou art scattered to the ends of heaven, from thence thy Lord God shall draw thee;
DEU 30:5 and he shall take thee, and bring thee into the land which thy fathers wielded; and thou shalt hold it, and he shall bless thee, and shall make thee to be of more number than thy fathers were.
DEU 30:6 Thy Lord God shall circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou love thy Lord God in all thine heart, and in all thy soul, and thou mayest live.
DEU 30:7 Forsooth the Lord shall turn all these cursings on thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, and pursue thee.
DEU 30:8 Soothly thou shalt turn again, and thou shalt hear the voice of thy Lord God, and shalt do all the behests which I command to thee today;
DEU 30:9 and thy Lord God shall make thee to be plenteous, in all the works of thine hands, in the children of thy womb, and in the fruit of thy beasts, and in abundance of thy land, and in largeness of all things. For the Lord shall turn again, that he have joy upon thee in all goods, as he joyed in thy fathers;
DEU 30:10 if nevertheless thou hearest the voice of thy Lord God, and keepest his behests and his ceremonies, that be written in this law, and if thou turn again to thy Lord God in all thine heart, and in all thy soul.
DEU 30:11 This commandment which I command to thee today, is not above thee, neither it is set [[or put]] far from thee,
DEU 30:12 neither it is set in heaven, that thou say, Who of us may ascend or go up to heaven, that he bring it to us, and we hear it, and fulfill it in work?
DEU 30:13 neither it is set beyond the sea, that thou complain, and say, Who of us may pass over the sea, and bring it hither to us, that we may hear, and do that that is commanded to us?
DEU 30:14 But the word is full nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart, that thou do it.
DEU 30:15 Behold thou, that today I have set forth in thy sight life and good, and, on the contrary, death and evil;
DEU 30:16 that thou love thy Lord God, and go in his ways, and keep his behests, and his ceremonies, and his dooms; and that thou live, and he multiply thee, and bless thee in the land to which thou shalt enter to wield.
DEU 30:17 But if thine heart is turned away, and thou wilt not hear, and thou art deceived by error, and worshippest alien gods, and servest them,
DEU 30:18 I before-say to thee today, that thou shalt perish, and thou shalt dwell little time in the land, to which thou shalt enter to wield, when thou shalt pass over the Jordan.
DEU 30:19 I call today heaven and earth to witness, that is, angels and men, that I have set forth to you life and death, good and evil, blessing and cursing; therefore choose thou life, that both thou live and thy seed,
DEU 30:20 and that thou love thy Lord God, and obey to his voice, and cleave to him, for he is thy life, and the length of thy days; that thou dwell in the land, for which the Lord swore to thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that he should give it to them.
DEU 31:1 And so Moses went, and spake all these words to all Israel,
DEU 31:2 and said to them, I am today of an hundred and twenty years, I may no further go out and go in, mostly since also the Lord said to me, Thou shalt not pass over this Jordan.
DEU 31:3 Therefore thy Lord God shall pass over before thee; he shall do away these folks in thy sight, and thou shalt wield them; and this Joshua shall go before thee, as the Lord spake.
DEU 31:4 And the Lord shall do to them as he did to Sihon, and to Og, the kings of Amorites, and to their land; and he shall do them away.
DEU 31:5 Therefore when the Lord hath betaken to you also them, ye shall do in like manner to them, as I have commanded to you.
DEU 31:6 Do ye manly, and be ye comforted; do not ye dread in heart, neither dread ye at the sight of them, for thy Lord God himself is thy leader, and he shall not leave thee, neither forsake thee.
DEU 31:7 And Moses called Joshua, and said to him before all the multitude of the sons of Israel, Be thou comforted, and be thou strong; for thou shalt lead this people into the land that the Lord swore that he shall give to their fathers; and thou shalt part it by lot.
DEU 31:8 And the Lord himself, which is your leader, shall be with thee, he shall not leave [[thee]], neither forsake thee; do not thou dread outwardly, neither dread thou in heart.
DEU 31:9 Therefore Moses wrote this law, and betook it to the priests, the sons of Levi, that bare the ark of the bond of peace of the Lord, and to all the elder men of Israel.
DEU 31:10 And Moses commanded to them, and said, After seven years, in the year of remission, in the solemnity of tabernacles,
DEU 31:11 when all men of Israel shall come together, that they appear in the sight of their Lord God, in the place which the Lord choose, thou shalt read the words of this law before all Israel, while they hear,
DEU 31:12 and while all the people is gathered together, as well to men, as to women, to little children, and to comelings that be within thy gates; that they hear, and learn, and dread your Lord God, and keep and [[ful]] fill all the words of this law;
DEU 31:13 also that the sons of them, that now know not, may hear, and that they dread their Lord God in all days in which they live in the land to which ye shall go to get, when Jordan is passed over.
DEU 31:14 And the Lord said to Moses, Lo! the days of thy death be nigh; call thou Joshua, and stand ye in the tabernacle of witnessing, that I command to him. Therefore Moses and Joshua went, and they stood in the tabernacle of witnessing;
DEU 31:15 and the Lord appeared there in a pillar of cloud, that stood in the entering of the tabernacle.
DEU 31:16 And the Lord said to Moses, Lo! thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, and this people shall rise up, and it shall do fornication, or idolatry, going after alien gods in the land, into which it shall enter, that it dwell therein; there it shall forsake me, and shall make void the bond of peace, which I covenanted with it.
DEU 31:17 And my strong vengeance shall be wroth against that people in that day, and I shall forsake it, and I shall hide my face from it, and it shall be into devouring; all evils and tormentings shall find it, so that it say in that day, Verily for the Lord is not with me, these evils have found me.
DEU 31:18 Soothly I shall hide my face, and cover it in that day, for all the evils which this people hath done, for it hath pursued [[or followed]] alien gods.
DEU 31:19 Now therefore write ye to you this song, and teach ye the sons of Israel, that they hold it in mind, and sing it in mouth; and that this song be to me for a witnessing among the sons of Israel.
DEU 31:20 For I shall lead him into the land, for which I swore to his fathers, flowing with milk and honey; and when they have eaten, and be full-filled, and be made fat, they shall turn to alien gods, and they shall serve them; and they shall backbite me, and shall make void my covenant.
DEU 31:21 After that many evils and tormentings have found them, this song shall answer to him for witness-ing, which song no forgetting shall do away from the mouth of thy seed. For I know the thoughts thereof today, what things it shall do, before that I bring it into the land which I promised to it.
DEU 31:22 Therefore Moses wrote the song, and he taught it to the sons of Israel.
DEU 31:23 And the Lord commanded to Joshua, the son of Nun, and said, Be thou comforted, and be thou strong; for thou shalt lead the sons of Israel into the land which I promised, and I shall be with thee.
DEU 31:24 Therefore after that Moses had written the words of this law in a book, and fulfilled them,
DEU 31:25 he commanded to the Levites that bare the ark of the bond of peace of the Lord, and said,
DEU 31:26 Take ye this book, and put ye it in the side of the ark of the bond of peace of your Lord God, that it be there against thee into witnessing.
DEU 31:27 For I know thy striving, and thy most hard noll; yet while I lived and entered with you, ye did ever[[more]] strivingly against the Lord; how much more when I shall be dead.
DEU 31:28 Gather ye to me all the greater men in birth, and teachers [[or doctors]], by your lineages, and I shall speak to them, hearing these words, and I shall call against them heaven and earth.
DEU 31:29 For I know, that after my death, ye shall do wickedly, and shall bow away soon from the way which I commanded to you; and evils shall come to you in the last times, when ye have done evil in the sight of the Lord, that ye stir him to wrath by the works of your hands.
DEU 31:30 Therefore while all the company of the sons of Israel heard, Moses spake the words of this song, and he fulfilled it unto the end.
DEU 32:1 Ye heavens, hear what things I shall speak; the earth hear the words of my mouth.
DEU 32:2 My teaching wax altogether as rain; my speech flow out as dew, as soft rain upon herb, and as drops upon grass.
DEU 32:3 For I shall inwardly call the name of the Lord; give ye glory to our God.
DEU 32:4 The works of God be perfect, and all his ways be dooms; God is faith-ful, and without any wickedness; he is just [[or rightwise]] and rightful.
DEU 32:5 They sinned against him, and not his sons in the filths of idolatry; shrewd and wayward generation.
DEU 32:6 Whether thou yieldest these things to the Lord, thou fond [[or foolish]] people and unwise? Whether he is not thy father, that wielded thee, and made, and formed thee of nought?
DEU 32:7 Have thou mind of eld [[or old]] days, think thou all generations; ask thy father, and he shall tell to thee, ask thy greater men, and they shall say to thee.
DEU 32:8 When the Highest parted folks, when he separated the sons of Adam, he ordained the terms of peoples by the number of the sons of Israel.
DEU 32:9 Forsooth the part of the Lord is his people; Jacob is the little part of his heritage.
DEU 32:10 The Lord found him in a desert land, in the place of horror, either hideousness, and of waste wilderness; the Lord led him about, and taught him, and he kept him as the apple of his eye.
DEU 32:11 As an eagle stirring his birds to fly, and flying above them, he spreaded forth his wings, and took them into his protection, and he bare them in his shoulders.
DEU 32:12 The Lord alone was his leader, and none alien god was with him.
DEU 32:13 The Lord ordained him on an high land, that he should eat the fruits of fields, that he should suck honey of a stone, and oil of the hardest rock;
DEU 32:14 butter of the drove, and milk of sheep, with the fatness of lambs, and of rams, of the sons of Bashan; and that he should eat kids with [[the]] marrow, or tried flour, of wheat, and he should drink the clearest blood, or wine, of the grape.
DEU 32:15 The beloved people was made fat, and kicked against; made fat without-forth, made fat within, and alarged; he forsook God his maker, and went away from God his health or his saviour.
DEU 32:16 They stirred God to wrath in alien gods that they praised, they stirred him to wrathfulness in their abominations, that is, their own findings.
DEU 32:17 They offered to fiends, or devils, and not to God, to gods which they knew not, new gods, and freshly came up by their findings, which their fathers worshipped not.
DEU 32:18 Thou hast forsaken God that begat thee, and thou hast forgotten thy Lord creator or the Lord thy maker.
DEU 32:19 The Lord saw that, and he was stirred to wrathfulness; for his sons, and daughters stirred him to vengeance.
DEU 32:20 And the Lord said, I shall hide my face from them, and I shall behold their last things; for this is a wayward generation, and unfaithful sons they be.
DEU 32:21 They have stirred me to wrath in worshipping him that was not God, and they have moved me to vengeance in their vain idols; and I shall stir them in him, that is not a people, and I shall stir them to ire in a fond [[or foolish]] folk.
DEU 32:22 Fire is kindled in my strong vengeance, and it shall burn unto the last things of hell; and it shall devour the land with his fruit, and it shall burn the foundaments of hills.
DEU 32:23 I shall gather evils on them, and I shall [[ful]] fill mine arrows in them.
DEU 32:24 They shall be wasted with hunger, and birds shall devour them with most bitter biting; I shall send into them the teeth of beasts, with the strong vengeance of drawing upon earth, and of serpents.
DEU 32:25 Sword withoutforth, and dread within, shall waste them; a young man and a virgin together, a sucking child with an eld [[or old]] man.
DEU 32:26 And I said, Where be they now? I shall make the mind or memory of them to cease of all men.
DEU 32:27 But I delayed, or tarried, for the wrath of enemies, lest peradventure their enemies should be proud, and say, Our high hand, and not the Lord’s, did all these things.
DEU 32:28 It is a folk without counsel, and without prudence, or wariness;
DEU 32:29 I would that they savoured, and understood, and purveyed the last things.
DEU 32:30 How pursued one man of enemies a thousand of Jews, and two men drove away ten thousand? Whether not therefore for their God had sold them, forsaking them, and the Lord had enclosed them altogether in their enemies? hands?
DEU 32:31 For our God is not as the gods of them, and our enemies be judges.
DEU 32:32 The vine of them is of the vine of Sodom, and of the suburbs of Gomorrah; the grape of them is the grape of gall, and the cluster is most bitter.
DEU 32:33 The gall of dragons is the wine of them, and the venom of adders, that may not be healed.
DEU 32:34 Whether these things be not hid with me, and be sealed in my treasuries [[or treasures]]?
DEU 32:35 Vengeance is mine, and I shall yield to them in time, that the foot of them slide; the day of perdition is nigh, and the times hasten to be present.
DEU 32:36 The Lord shall deem his people, and he shall do mercy in his servants; the people shall see that the hand of fighters is sick, or feeble, and also men enclosed failed, and the remnant people, or left, be wasted.
DEU 32:37 And they shall say, Where be their gods, in which they had trust?
DEU 32:38 Of whose sacrifices they ate the fatnesses, and they drank the wine of flowing sacrifices, rise they and help you, and defend they you in need.
DEU 32:39 See, or understand, ye, that I am God alone, and none other God is except me; I shall slay, and I shall make to live; I shall smite, and I shall make whole; and none is that may deliver from mine hand.
DEU 32:40 And I shall raise up mine hand to heaven, and I shall say, I live without end.
DEU 32:41 If I shall whet my sword as lightning, and mine hand shall take doom, I shall yield vengeance to mine enemies, and I shall requite to them that hate me.
DEU 32:42 I shall full-fill mine arrows with blood, and my sword shall devour fleshes of the blood of them that be slain, and of the captivity, of the heads of enemies made naked.
DEU 32:43 Folks, praise ye the people of him, for he shall avenge the blood of his servants, and he shall yield vengeance to the enemies of them; and he shall be merciful to the land of his people.
DEU 32:44 Therefore Moses came, and spake all the words of this song in the ears of the people; both he and Joshua, the son of Nun.
DEU 32:45 And Moses fulfilled all these words, and spake to all Israel,
DEU 32:46 and said to them, Put ye your hearts into all the words which I witness to you today, that ye command to your sons, to keep, and to do those [[or them]], and to fulfill all things that be written in the book of this law;
DEU 32:47 for not in vain these things be commanded to you, but that all men should live in doing those things; which if ye shall do, then ye shall abide, and shall continue long time in the land, to which ye shall enter to wield, when Jordan ye have over-passed.
DEU 32:48 And the Lord spake to Moses in the same day, and said,
DEU 32:49 Go thou up into this hill Abarim, that is, passing, into the hill of Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, against Jericho; and see thou the land of Canaan, which I shall give to the sons of Israel to hold,
DEU 32:50 and die thou there in this hill. Into which hill thou shalt go up, and thou shalt be joined to thy peoples, as Aaron, thy brother, was dead in the hill of Hor, and was put to his peoples.
DEU 32:51 For ye trespassed against me, in the midst of the sons of Israel, at the waters of Against-saying, in Kadesh, of the desert of Zin; and ye hallowed not me among the sons of Israel.
DEU 32:52 Opposite, thou shalt see the land, and thou shalt not enter into it, which I shall give to the sons of Israel.
DEU 33:1 This is the blessing, with which Moses, the man of God, blessed the sons of Israel before his death;
DEU 33:2 and said, The Lord came from Sinai, and he rose to us from Seir; he appeared from the hill of Paran, and thousands of saints with him; a law of fire in his right hand.
DEU 33:3 He loved peoples; all saints be in his hand, and they that nigh to his feet shall take of his doctrine.
DEU 33:4 Moses commanded the law to us, the heritage of the multitude of Jacob.
DEU 33:5 And the king shall be at the most rightful, when princes of the people be gathered together with the lineages of Israel.
DEU 33:6 Reuben live, and die not, and be he little in number.
DEU 33:7 This is the blessing of Judah; Lord, hear thou the voice of Judah, and bring in him to his people; his hands shall fight for him, and the helper of him, shall be against his adversaries.
DEU 33:8 Also he said to Levi, Thy perfection and thy teaching is of an holy man, whom thou hast proved in temptation, and hast deemed at the waters of Against-saying;
DEU 33:9 which Levi said to his father and to his mother, I know not you, and to his brethren, I know not them; and knew not his sons. These kept thy speech, and these kept thy covenant;
DEU 33:10 O! Jacob, they kept thy dooms, and thy law, O! Israel; they shall put incense in thy strong vengeance, and burnt sacrifice on thine altar.
DEU 33:11 Lord, bless thou the strength of him, and receive thou the works of his hands; smite thou the backs of his enemies, and they that hate him, rise they not.
DEU 33:12 And he said to Benjamin, The most loved of the Lord shall dwell trustily in him; he shall dwell all day as in a chamber, and he shall rest betwixt the shoulders of the Lord.
DEU 33:13 Also he said to Joseph, His land is of the Lord’s blessing; of the apples of heaven, and of the dew, and of water lying beneath;
DEU 33:14 of the apples of the fruits of the sun, and moon;
DEU 33:15 [[and]] of the top of eld [[or old]] mountains, and of the apples of ever-lasting little hills;
DEU 33:16 and of the fruits of the land, and of the fullness thereof. The blessing of him that appeared in the bush come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the foretop, that is, the crown of the head, of the Nazarite, or holy one, among his brethren.
DEU 33:17 As the first engendered of a bull is the fairness of him; the horns of an unicorn be the horns of him; in those [[or them]] he shall winnow folks, till to the terms of [[the]] earth. These be the multitudes of Ephraim, and these be the thousands of Manasseh.
DEU 33:18 And he said to Zebulun, Zebulun, be thou glad in thy going out, and Issachar, in thy tabernacles.
DEU 33:19 They shall call peoples to the hill, [[and]] there they shall offer sacrifices of rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; which shall suck the flowing of the sea as milk, and hid treasures of gravel.
DEU 33:20 And he said to Gad, Gad is blessed in broadness; he rested as a lion, and he took from his adversary the arm and the noll or head.
DEU 33:21 And he saw his princehood, that he was kept a teacher in his part; the which was with princes of the people, and he did the rightfulnesses [[or rightwisenesses]] of the Lord, and his doom with Israel.
DEU 33:22 Also he said to Dan, Dan, a whelp of a lion, shall flow largely from Bashan.
DEU 33:23 And he said to Naphtali, Naphtali shall use abundance, and he shall be full with blessings of the Lord; and he shall wield the sea and the south.
DEU 33:24 Also he said to Asher, Asher, be blessed in sons, and please he his brethren; dip he his foot in oil.
DEU 33:25 Iron and brass the shoes of him; as the day of thy youth, so and thine eld age.
DEU 33:26 None other god is as the God of the most rightful [[or the most right God]]; the rider of heaven is thine helper; clouds run about by the glory of him.
DEU 33:27 His dwelling place is above, and his arms everlasting be beneath; he shall cast out from thy face the enemy, and he shall say to them, Be thou all-broken.
DEU 33:28 Israel shall dwell trustily and alone; the eye of Jacob is in the land of wheat, and of wine; and heavens shall be dark with dew.
DEU 33:29 Blessed art thou, Israel; thou people that art saved in the Lord, who is like thee? The shield of thine help and the sword of thy glory is thy God; thine enemies shall deny thee, and thou shalt tread their necks.
DEU 34:1 Therefore Moses went up from the field places of Moab upon the hill of Nebo, into the top of Pisgah, against Jericho. And the Lord showed to him all the land of Gilead, till to Dan,
DEU 34:2 and all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim and of Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto the last, or furtherest, sea;
DEU 34:3 and the south part, and the breadth of the field of Jericho, of the city of Palms, till to Zoar.
DEU 34:4 And the Lord said to him, This is the land for which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and I said, I shall give it to thy seed; thou hast seen it with thine eyes, and thou shalt not pass over to it.
DEU 34:5 And Moses, the servant of the Lord, was dead there, in the land of Moab, for the Lord commanded.
DEU 34:6 And the Lord buried him in a valley of the land of Moab, against Bethpeor; and no man knew his sepulchre unto this day.
DEU 34:7 Moses was of an hundred and twenty years when he died; his eye dimmed not, neither his teeth were stirred.
DEU 34:8 And the sons of Israel bewept him thirty days in the field places of Moab; and the days of wailing of men bemourning Moses were fulfilled.
DEU 34:9 Soothly Joshua, the son of Nun, was full-filled with the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had put his hands upon him; and the sons of Israel obeyed to Joshua, and did as the Lord commanded to Moses.
DEU 34:10 And a prophet rose no more in Israel as Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face,
DEU 34:11 in all the miracles, and great wonders, which the Lord sent, or did, by him, that he should do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land,
DEU 34:12 and all the strong hand, or power, and the great marvels, which Moses did before all Israel. Here endeth Pentateuch, see now the prologue of Joshua.
1SA 1:1 There was a man of Ramathaim in Zophim, of the hill of Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, son of Elihi, son of Tohu, son of Zuph, of Ephraim.
1SA 1:2 And Elkanah had two wives; the name to the one was Hannah, and the name of the second was Peninnah; and sons were to Peninnah; but Hannah had none free children.
1SA 1:3 And that man went up from his city in the days that were ordained, to worship and to offer sacrifice to the Lord of hosts in Shiloh. And [[the]] two sons of Eli were there, Hophni and Phinehas, priests of the Lord.
1SA 1:4 Then the day came, and Elkanah offered, and he gave parts to Peninnah, his wife, and to all his sons and daughters;
1SA 1:5 forsooth he gave sorrowfully one part, either double, to Hannah, for he loved Hannah; forsooth the Lord had closed her womb.
1SA 1:6 And her enemy Peninnah tormented her, and anguished her greatly, in so much that she upbraided her, that the Lord had closed her womb.
1SA 1:7 And so Peninnah did each year, when the time came that they went up into the house of the Lord; and so she stirred Hannah. And then she wept, and took no meat.
1SA 1:8 Therefore Elkanah, her husband, said to her, Hannah, why weepest thou, and why eatest thou not, and why is thine heart tormented? Whether I am not better to thee than be ten sons?
1SA 1:9 Soothly Hannah rose, after that she had eaten and drunk in Shiloh. And the while Eli [[the priest]] was on his great seat before the doorposts of the house of the Lord,
1SA 1:10 and when she was in bitter sorrow of soul, she prayed the Lord, and wept largely;
1SA 1:11 and she made a vow to the Lord, and said, Lord God of hosts, if thou beholdest, and seest the torment of thy servantess, and if thou hast mind of me, and forgettest not thine handmaid, and givest a son to thy servantess, I shall give him to the Lord all the days of his life, and a razor shall not come upon his head.
1SA 1:12 And it was done, when she multiplied her prayers before the Lord, that Eli espied her mouth.
1SA 1:13 Forsooth Hannah spake in her heart, and only her lips were moved, and utterly her voice was not heard. Therefore Eli guessed her drunken,
1SA 1:14 and he said to her, How long shalt thou be drunken? Avoid thou a little the wine, by which thou art moist.
1SA 1:15 Hannah answered, and said, Nay, my lord, for I am an unhappy woman; I have not drunk wine, neither any-thing that may make drunken, but I have poured out my soul in the Lord’s sight;
1SA 1:16 guess thou not thine handmaid as one of the daughters of Belial, for of the multitude of my sorrow and of my mourning I have spoken unto this present time.
1SA 1:17 Then Eli said to her, Go thou in peace, and God of Israel give to thee the asking that thou hast prayed him.
1SA 1:18 And she said, I would that thine handmaid find grace in thine eyes. And the woman went into her way, and ate, and her cheers were no more changed diversely.
1SA 1:19 And they rised early, and worship-ped before the Lord; and they turned again, and came into their house in Ramah. And Elkanah knew Hannah, his wife; and the Lord thought on her.
1SA 1:20 And it was done after the compass of days, Hannah conceived, and childed a son, and called his name Samuel; for she had asked him of the Lord.
1SA 1:21 And her husband Elkanah went up, and all his house, to offer a solemn sacrifice, and his avow [[or vow]] to the Lord.
1SA 1:22 And Hannah went not up to that solemnity or feast, for she had said to her husband, I shall not go, till the young child be weaned, and till I lead him thither, and he appear before the sight of the Lord, and dwell there continually.
1SA 1:23 And Elkanah, her husband, said to her, Do thou that that seemeth good to thee, and dwell thou still till thou have weaned him; and I beseech, that the Lord [[ful]] fill his word. There-fore the woman abode, and gave milk to her son, till the time she removed him from the milk.
1SA 1:24 And she brought him with her, after that she had weaned him, with three calves, and three bushels of meal, and an amphora, either a pot, of wine; and she brought him to the house of the Lord in Shiloh. And the child was yet full young.
1SA 1:25 And they sacrificed a calf, and they offered the child to Eli.
1SA 1:26 And Hannah said, My lord, I beseech thee, thy soul liveth; I am the woman, that stood before thee here, and prayed the Lord;
1SA 1:27 for this child I prayed, and the Lord gave to me mine asking which I asked of him;
1SA 1:28 therefore and I have given him to the Lord in all [[the]] days, in which he is given to the Lord. And they worshipped there the Lord.
1SA 2:1 And Hannah worshipped, and said, Mine heart fully joyed in the Lord, and mine horn is raised in my God; my mouth is alarged on mine enemies, for I was glad in thine health.
1SA 2:2 None is holy as the Lord is; for none other is, except thee, and none is strong as our God.
1SA 2:3 Do not ye multiply to speak high things, and have glory therein; eld [[or old]] things go away from your mouth; for God is Lord of knowings, and thoughts be made ready to him.
1SA 2:4 The bow of strong men is over-come, and feeble men be girded with strength.
1SA 2:5 Men full-filled before, setted them-selves to hire for loaves, and hungry men be filled; while the barren woman childed full many, and she that had many sons, was made sick.
1SA 2:6 The Lord slayeth, and quickeneth; he leadeth forth to hells, and bringeth again.
1SA 2:7 The Lord maketh poor, and he maketh rich; he maketh low, and he raiseth up.
1SA 2:8 He raiseth a needy man from powder, and he raiseth a poor man from drit, that he sit with princes, and hold the seat of glory; for the ends of [[the]] earth be of the Lord, and he hath set the world on those [[or them]].
1SA 2:9 He shall keep the feet of his saints, and wicked men shall be still altogether in darknesses; for a man shall not be made strong in his own strength.
1SA 2:10 [[The]] Adversaries of the Lord shall dread him, and from heavens he shall thunder upon them; the Lord shall deem the ends of [[the]] earth, and he shall give lordship to his king, and he shall enhance the horn, that is, power, of his Christ, or his anointed.
1SA 2:11 And Elkanah went into Ramah, into his house; and the child was a servant in the sight of the Lord before the face of Eli the priest.
1SA 2:12 Forsooth the sons of Eli were the sons of Belial, and they knew not the Lord,
1SA 2:13 neither the office of priests to the people; but whoever had offered sacrifice, the child or servant of the priest came, while the fleshes were in seething, and he had a fleshhook with three teeth in his hand;
1SA 2:14 and he sent it into the great vessel of stone, either into the cauldron, either into the pot, either into the pan; and whatever thing the fleshhook raised, the priest took that to himself; so they did to all Israel of men coming into Shiloh.
1SA 2:15 Yea, before that they burnt the inner fatness, the priest’s child came, and said to the offerer, Give thou flesh to me or Give to me the flesh, that I seethe it to the priest; for I shall not take of thee sodden flesh, but raw.
1SA 2:16 And he that offered said to him, Be first the inner fatness burnt today after the custom, and take thou then to thee how much ever thy soul desireth. The which answered, and said to him, Nay, but thou shalt give it now; for else I shall take it by violence.
1SA 2:17 Therefore the sin of the children or young men was full grievous before the Lord; for they withdrew men from the sacrifice of the Lord.
1SA 2:18 Forsooth Samuel, a child girded with a linen cloth, ministered before the face of the Lord.
1SA 2:19 And his mother made to him a little coat, the which she brought to him in the days ordained to offer, and she went up with her husband, that he would offer a solemn offering, and his avow [[or vow]].
1SA 2:20 And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife; and said, The Lord yield to thee seed of this woman, for the gift which thou hast given to the Lord. And they went into their place again.
1SA 2:21 Therefore the Lord visited Hannah, and she conceived, and childed three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel was magnified at the Lord.
1SA 2:22 And Eli was full eld [[or old]], and he heard all the things that his sons did in all Israel, and how they slept with women, that waited at the door of the tabernacle.
1SA 2:23 And he said to them, Why do ye such things, the worst things, which I hear of all the people?
1SA 2:24 Do not ye, my sons; it is not a good fame, that I hear, that ye make the Lord’s people to do trespass.
1SA 2:25 If a man sinneth against a man, God may be pleased to him by prayers and sacrifices; but if a man sinneth against the Lord, who shall pray for him? And they heard not the voice of their father, for God would slay them.
1SA 2:26 Forsooth the child Samuel profited, and increased, and pleased both God and men.
1SA 2:27 Soothly a man of God came to Eli, and said to him, The Lord saith these things, Whether I was not showed apertly to the house of thy father, when he was in Egypt, in the house of Pharaoh?
1SA 2:28 And I chose him of all the lineages of Israel to be a priest to me, that he should go up to mine altar, and should burn incense to me, and that he should bear before me a priest’s cloth; and I gave to the house of thy father all things of the sacrifices of the sons of Israel.
1SA 2:29 Why hast thou cast away with the heel my sacrifice, and my gifts, which I [[have]] commanded to be offered in the temple; and thou honouredest more thy sons than me, that ye eat the principal parts of each sacrifice of Israel my people?
1SA 2:30 Therefore the Lord God of Israel saith these things, I speaking spake, that thine house, and the house of thy father, should minister in my sight till into without end; now forsooth the Lord saith, Far be this from me; but whoever honoureth me, I shall glorify him; forsooth they that despise me, shall be unnoble.
1SA 2:31 Lo! [[the]] days come, and I shall cut away thine arm, or thy power, and the arm of the house of thy father, that an eld [[or old]] man be not in thine house.
1SA 2:32 And thou shalt see thine enemy in the temple, in all the prosperities of Israel; and an eld [[or old]] man shall not be in thine house in all days.
1SA 2:33 Nevertheless I shall not utterly take away of thee a man from mine altar, but that thine eyes fail, and thy soul fail or thy life languish; and a great part of thine house shall die, when it shall come to man’s age.
1SA 2:34 Forsooth this shall be [[the]] sign, that shall come to thy two sons, Hophni and Phinehas; both they shall die in one day.
1SA 2:35 And I shall raise to me a faithful priest, that shall do by mine heart and my soul; and I shall build to him a faithful house, and he shall go before my Christ, or mine anointed in all days.
1SA 2:36 Forsooth it shall come, that who-ever [[still]] dwelleth in thine house, that he come to bow for himself, in an half-penny of silver, and a cake of bread, and say, I beseech, suffer thou me to one part of the priests’ offices, that I eat a morsel of bread.
1SA 3:1 Forsooth the child Samuel ministered to the Lord before Eli, and the word of the Lord was precious; in those days was none open revelation.
1SA 3:2 Therefore it was done in a day, Eli lay in his bed, and his eyes dimmed, and he might not see;
1SA 3:3 the lantern of the Lord was not yet quenched. And Samuel slept in the temple of the Lord, where the ark of God was.
1SA 3:4 And the Lord called Samuel; and he answered and said, Lo! I or Lo! I am ready.
1SA 3:5 And he ran to Eli, and said to him, Lo! I; for thou calledest me. And Eli said, I called not thee; turn thou again and sleep. And he went and slept.
1SA 3:6 And the Lord added again to call Samuel; and Samuel rose, and went to Eli, and said, Lo! I am here; for thou calledest me. And Eli answered, I called not thee, my son; turn thou again and sleep.
1SA 3:7 Forsooth Samuel knew not yet the Lord, neither the word of the Lord was showed to him.
1SA 3:8 And the Lord added, and called yet Samuel the third time; the which rose up and went to Eli, and said, Lo! I; for thou calledest me. Then Eli understood, that the Lord had called the child;
1SA 3:9 and Eli said to Samuel, Go thou and sleep; and if he calleth thee afterward, thou shalt say, Speak thou, Lord, for thy servant heareth. Then Samuel went and slept in his place.
1SA 3:10 And the Lord came, and stood, and called as he had called the second time, Samuel, Samuel. And Samuel said, Speak thou, Lord, for thy servant heareth.
1SA 3:11 And the Lord said to Samuel, Lo! I shall make a word, that is, a thing signified by a word, in Israel, which word whoever shall hear, both his ears shall ring, that is, he shall be astonied for wonder and dread.
1SA 3:12 In that day I shall raise up against Eli all things that I have spoken upon his house; I shall begin it, and I shall end it.
1SA 3:13 For I before-said to him, that I should deem his house without end for the wickedness thereof; for he knew, that his sons did unworthily, and he chastised not them.
1SA 3:14 Therefore I have sworn to the house of Eli, that the wickedness of his meine, or house, shall not be cleansed with sacrifices and gifts till into without end.
1SA 3:15 And then Samuel slept till the morrowtide, and he opened the doors of the house of the Lord; and Samuel dreaded to show the revelation to Eli.
1SA 3:16 Therefore Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he answered and said, I am ready.
1SA 3:17 And Eli asked him, What is the word that the Lord hath spoken to thee? I pray thee, hide it not from me; God do to thee these things, and increase these things, if thou hidest from me a word of all [[the]] words that be said to thee.
1SA 3:18 And Samuel showed to him all the words, and hid not anything from him. And Eli answered, He is the Lord; do he that, that is good in his eyes.
1SA 3:19 Forsooth Samuel increased, and the Lord was with him, and none of all his words felled into [[the]] earth, that is, in vain, for all was fulfilled.
1SA 3:20 And all Israel from Dan to Beer-sheba knew, that faithful Samuel was a prophet of the Lord.
1SA 3:21 And the Lord added to appear again in Shiloh, for the Lord was showed to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the Lord;
1SA 4:1 and the word of Samuel came to all Israel. And it was done in those days Philistines came together into battle; for Israel went out against the Philistines into battle, and setted tents beside the stone of help or Ebenezer. And the Philistines came into Aphek,
1SA 4:2 and made ready battle array against Israel. And when the battle was begun, Israel turned their backs to [[the]] Philistines; and as four thousand of men were slain in that battle every-where by fields; and the people of Israel turned again to their tents.
1SA 4:3 And the greater men in birth of Israel said, Why hath the Lord smitten us today before the Philistines? Bring we to us from Shiloh the ark of the bond of peace of the Lord, and come it into the midst of us, that it save us from the hand of our enemies.
1SA 4:4 Therefore the people sent into Shiloh, and they took from thence the ark of the bond of peace of the Lord of hosts, that sat on cherubim. And Hophni and Phinehas, the two sons of Eli, were with the ark of the bond of peace of the Lord.
1SA 4:5 And when the ark of [[the]] bond of peace of the Lord had come into the tents, all Israel cried [[out]] with [[a]] great cry, and the earth sounded.
1SA 4:6 And the Philistines heard the voice of their cry, and they said, And what is this voice of great cry in the tents of Hebrews? And they knew, that the ark of [[the]] bond of peace of the Lord had come into the tents of Israel.
1SA 4:7 And the Philistines dreaded, and said, God is come into their tents; and they wailed, and said, Woe to us! for so great out-joying was not there yesterday, and the third day passed;
1SA 4:8 woe to us! who shall keep us from the hand of these high gods? these be the gods, that smited Egypt with all vengeance in desert.
1SA 4:9 Philistines, be ye comforted, and be ye men, serve ye not to the Hebrews, as they have served to you; be ye comforted, and fight ye against Israel.
1SA 4:10 Then the Philistines fought, and Israel was overcome, and each man fled into his tabernacle; and a full great vengeance was made, and thirty thousand of footmen of Israel felled down.
1SA 4:11 And the ark of God was taken; and, the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were dead.
1SA 4:12 And a man of Benjamin ran from the battle array, and came into Shiloh in that day, with his cloth rent, and with his head besprinkled with dust;
1SA 4:13 and when he was come, Eli sat upon a seat, and beheld against the way; for his heart was dreading for the ark of the Lord. And after that that man had entered, he told what had happened to the men of the city, and all the city yelled.
1SA 4:14 And Eli heard the sound of the cry, and he said, What is the sound of this noise? And the man hasted, and came, and told to Eli.
1SA 4:15 And Eli was of fourscore years and eighteen, and his eyes dimmed or darkened, and he might not see.
1SA 4:16 And the man said to Eli, I am he that came from the battle, and I am he that fled today from the battle array. To whom Eli said, My son, what is there done?
1SA 4:17 And he that told answered, and said, Israel hath fled before the Philistines, and a great falling is made in the people of Israel; furthermore and thy two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, be dead, and the ark of God is taken.
1SA 4:18 And when he named the ark of God, Eli felled from the seat back-ward beside the door, and was dead; for his neck was broken. For he was an eld [[or old]] man, and of great age; and he deemed Israel forty years.
1SA 4:19 And his daughter-in-law, Phinehas’ wife, was with child, and nigh the child bearing; and when the message was heard or when she heard by the messenger, that the ark of God was taken, and that her father-in-law was dead, and her husband, she bowed herself down, and childed; for sudden sorrows felled into her.
1SA 4:20 And in that moment of her death, women that stood about her said to her, Dread thou not, for thou hast childed a son. And she answered not to them, neither she took heed.
1SA 4:21 And she called the child Ichabod, that is, without glory, and said, The glory of the Lord is translated from Israel, for the ark of God is taken; and for her father-in-law and for her husband
1SA 4:22 she said, The glory of God is translated or is taken from Israel, for the ark of God is taken.
1SA 5:1 And the Philistines took the ark of God, and bare it away from the stone of help into Ashdod.
1SA 5:2 And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it into the temple of Dagon, and setted it beside Dagon.
1SA 5:3 And when men of Ashdod had risen early in the tother day, lo! Dagon lay low in the earth before the ark of the Lord. And they took Dagon, and restored him in his place.
1SA 5:4 And again they rose early in the tother day, and they found Dagon lying on his face upon the earth before the ark of the Lord. And the head of Dagon, and the two palms of his hands, were broken off, and were lying upon the threshold; and the stock alone of Dagon was left in his place.
1SA 5:5 For this cause the priests of Dagon, and all that enter into his temple, tread not upon the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day.
1SA 5:6 Forsooth the hand of the Lord was made grievous upon [[the]] men of Ashdod, and he destroyed them, and he smote Ashdod and the coasts thereof in the privier part of [[the]] buttocks or in the more privy part of their tail ends.
1SA 5:7 And men of Ashdod saw such a vengeance, and they said, The ark of God of Israel dwell not with us; for his hand is hard on us, and on Dagon our god.
1SA 5:8 And they sent, and gathered all the wise men, either princes, of Philistines to them, and said, What shall we do of the ark of God of Israel? And the men of Gath answered, The ark of God of Israel be led about; and they led about the ark of God of Israel.
1SA 5:9 And while they led it about, the hand of the Lord was made upon all the cities about, of full great slaughter; and he smote men of each city, from a little man till to the more, and the lower entrails of them waxed rotten, and came forth; and men of Gath took counsel, and they made to them-selves seats of skins, either cushions.
1SA 5:10 Therefore they sent the ark of the Lord into Ekron. And when the ark of the Lord had come into Ekron, men of Ekron cried [[out]], and said, They have brought to us the ark of God of Israel, that he slay us and our people.
1SA 5:11 Then they sent, and gathered together all the wise men, either princes, of Philistines; which said, Deliver ye the ark of God of Israel, and turn it again into his place, and slay not us with our people. For dread of death was made in all [[the]] cities, and the hand of the Lord was full grievous.
1SA 5:12 And the men, that were not dead, were smitten in the privy parts of their buttocks, and the yelling of each city went up into heaven.
1SA 6:1 Therefore the ark of the Lord was in the country of [[the]] Philistines for seven months;
1SA 6:2 and after these things the Philistines called together [[the]] priests and false diviners, and said, What shall we do of the ark of God? Show ye to us, how we shall send it into his place.
1SA 6:3 Which said, If ye send again the ark of God of Israel, do not ye deliver it void, but yield ye to him that thing, that ye owe for [[the]] sin; and then ye shall be healed, and ye shall know, why his hand goeth not away from you.
1SA 6:4 And they said, What is it, that we owe to yield to him for trespass? And they answered to them, By the number of the provinces of Philistines, ye shall make five golden arses, and five golden mice; for one vengeance was to all of you, and to your wise men, either princes.
1SA 6:5 And ye shall make the likeness of your arses, and the likeness of [[the]] mice that destroyed your land; and ye shall give glory to [[the]] God of Israel, if in hap he withdraw his hand from you, and from your gods, and from your land.
1SA 6:6 Why make ye heavy your hearts, as Egypt and Pharaoh grieved their hearts? Whether not after that he was smitten, then he delivered God’s people, and they went forth?
1SA 6:7 Now therefore take ye, and make a new wain, and join ye therein two kine having calves, on which kine no yoke was put; and enclose ye their calves at home.
1SA 6:8 And ye shall take the ark of the Lord, and ye shall set it in the wain; and ye shall put in a little coffer at the side of the ark the golden vessels, which ye have paid to the Lord for your trespass; and deliver ye the ark, that it go forth.
1SA 6:9 And ye shall behold it, and soothly if it goeth up against Bethshemesh by the way of his coasts, the Lord hath then done to you this great evil; but if it go not thither, we shall know that the hand of the Lord touched not us, but this thing hath fallen to us by hap.
1SA 6:10 Then they did in this manner; and they took two kine that gave milk to their calves, and they joined them to the wain; and they enclosed their calves at home.
1SA 6:11 And they put the ark of God upon the wain, and the little coffer, that had the gold mice, and the likeness of their arses.
1SA 6:12 And the kine went straightly by the way that leadeth to Bethshemesh; and those kine went in one way going and lowing, and they bowed not neither to the right side nor to the left side; but also the wise men of Philistines followed unto the coasts of Bethshemesh.
1SA 6:13 Forsooth men of Bethshemesh reaped wheat in the valley, and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and they were joyful, when they had seen it.
1SA 6:14 And the wain came into the field of Joshua of Bethshemesh, and stood there. And a great stone was there; and they cutted the wood of the wain, and putted the kine on that wood, as a burnt sacrifice to the Lord.
1SA 6:15 And the deacons [[or Levites]] took down the ark of God, and the little coffer that was beside it, where-in the golden vessels were; and they putted those upon the great stone. And the men of Bethshemesh offered burnt sacrifices, and offered slain sacrifices in that day to the Lord.
1SA 6:16 And [[the]] five princes of Philistines saw, and turned again into Ekron in that day.
1SA 6:17 Soothly these be the golden arses, which the Philistines yielded to the Lord for their trespass; Ashdod yielded one; Gaza one; Askelon one; Gath one; Ekron one;
1SA 6:18 and the Philistines yielded golden mice by the number of cities of Philistines of [[the]] five provinces, from a walled city unto an unwalled town, and unto the great stone that was called Abel, on which they putted the ark of the Lord, the which stone was there unto that day in the field of Joshua of Bethshemesh.
1SA 6:19 Forsooth the Lord smote of the men of Bethshemesh, for they had seen the ark of the Lord, and he smote of the people seventy men, and fifty thousand of the poor-all. And the people mourned, for the Lord had smitten the people with [[a]] great vengeance.
1SA 6:20 And men of Bethshemesh said, Who shall now stand in the sight of the Lord God of this holy thing, and to whom shall it go up from us?
1SA 6:21 And they sent messengers to the dwellers of Kiriathjearim, and said, The Philistines have brought again the ark of the Lord; come ye down, and lead it again to you.
1SA 7:1 Therefore men of Kiriathjearim came, and led again the ark of the Lord, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in Gibeah. And they hallowed Eleazar his son, that he should keep the ark of the Lord.
1SA 7:2 And it was done, from which day the ark of the Lord dwelled in Kiriath-jearim, that the days were multiplied; for the twentieth year was now, after that Samuel began to teach the people; and all Israel rested after the Lord.
1SA 7:3 And Samuel spake to all the house of Israel, and said, If in all your heart ye turn again to the Lord, do ye away alien gods, Baalim, and Ashtaroth, from the midst of you; and make ye ready your hearts to the Lord, and serve ye him alone; and he shall deliver you from the hand of the Philistines.
1SA 7:4 Therefore the sons of Israel did away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the Lord alone.
1SA 7:5 And Samuel said, Gather ye all Israel into Mizpah, that I pray the Lord for you.
1SA 7:6 And they came together into Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it out in the Lord’s sight; and they fasted in that day, and said, Lord, we have sinned to thee. And Samuel deemed the sons of Israel in Mizpeh.
1SA 7:7 And the Philistines heard that the sons of Israel were gathered together in Mizpeh; and the princes of Philistines went up to Israel. And when the sons of Israel had heard this, they dreaded of the face of Philistines.
1SA 7:8 And they said to Samuel or And Israel cried to Samuel, Cease thou not to cry for us to our Lord God, that he save us from the hand of Philistines.
1SA 7:9 And Samuel took one sucking lamb, and offered it whole into burnt sacrifice to the Lord. And Samuel cried to the Lord for Israel; and the Lord heard him.
1SA 7:10 And it was done, when Samuel offered the burnt sacrifice, that the Philistines began battle against Israel. And the Lord thundered with great thunder in that day upon the Philistines, and made them afeared; and they were slain of the sons of Israel.
1SA 7:11 And the sons of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them unto the place that was under Bethcar.
1SA 7:12 And Samuel took one stone, and put it betwixt Mizpeh, and Shen; and he called the name of that place The stone of help or Ebenezer. And he said, Hitherto the Lord hath helped us.
1SA 7:13 And the Philistines were made low, and they added no more to come into the terms of Israel. And so the hand of the Lord was made [[up]] on Philistines in all the days of Samuel.
1SA 7:14 And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel, were yielded again to Israel, from Ekron unto Gath, and the coasts of Gath; and the Lord delivered Israel from the hand of Philistines; and peace was betwixt Israel and Amorites.
1SA 7:15 And Samuel deemed Israel all the days of his life, that is, till to the ordaining and confirming of Saul;
1SA 7:16 and he went by each year, and compassed Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and he deemed Israel in the foresaid places.
1SA 7:17 And he turned again into Ramah, for his house was there; and he deemed Israel there, and he builded there also an altar to the Lord.
1SA 8:1 And it was done, when Samuel waxed eld [[or old]], he set [[or put]] his sons to be judges of Israel.
1SA 8:2 And the name of his first begotten son was Joel, and the name of the second was Abiah, that were judges in Beersheba.
1SA 8:3 And his sons went not in his ways, but they bowed after avarice, and they took gifts, and perverted doom.
1SA 8:4 Therefore all the greater men in birth of Israel were gathered together, and came to Samuel into Ramah.
1SA 8:5 And they said to him, Lo! thou hast waxed eld [[or old]], and thy sons go not in thy ways; ordain thou a king to us, that he deem us, as also all other nations have.
1SA 8:6 And the word displeased in the eyes of Samuel, for they had said, Give thou to us a king, that he deem us. And Samuel prayed to the Lord.
1SA 8:7 And the Lord said to Samuel, Hear thou the voice of the people in all things that they speak to thee; for they have not cast away thee, but me, that I reign not upon them.
1SA 8:8 By all the works that they have done, from the day in which I led them out of Egypt unto this day, as they have forsaken me, and they have served alien gods, so they do also to thee.
1SA 8:9 Now therefore hear thou their voice; nevertheless witness thou to them; and before-say thou to them the right of the king, that shall reign upon them.
1SA 8:10 Then Samuel said all the words of the Lord to the people, that had asked of him a king;
1SA 8:11 and he said, This shall be the right of the king, that shall command to you; he shall take your sons, and he shall set them in his chariots; and he shall make them to himself riders, and before-goers of his carts;
1SA 8:12 and he shall ordain to him tribunes, that is, sovereigns of a thousand, and centurions, that is, sovereigns of an hundred, and earers or tillers of his fields, and reapers of his corns, and smiths of his arms, and of his chariots.
1SA 8:13 Also he shall make your daughters to be makers of his ointments, and his fire-makers, and bakers or his makers of bread.
1SA 8:14 And he shall take your fields, and your vineries [[or vines]], and the best places of olives, and he shall give those to his servants.
1SA 8:15 But also he shall take the tenth part of your corns, and the rents of your vineries [[or vines]], that he give those to his chamberlains, and [[to his]] servants.
1SA 8:16 And he shall take away your servants, and your handmaids, and your best young men, and your asses, and he shall set [[or put]] these in his work.
1SA 8:17 Also he shall take the tenth part of your flocks; and ye shall be his servants.
1SA 8:18 And ye shall cry in that day from the face of your king, whom ye have chosen to you; and the Lord shall not hear you in that day; for ye [[have]] asked for a king to you.
1SA 8:19 Soothly the people would not hear the voice of Samuel, but they said, Nay, for a king shall be on us;
1SA 8:20 and we also shall be as all folks, and our king shall deem us, and he shall go out before us, and he shall fight our battles for us.
1SA 8:21 And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he spake them in the ears of the Lord.
1SA 8:22 And the Lord said to Samuel, Hear thou their voices, and ordain thou a king upon them. And Samuel said to the men of Israel, Each man go into his city.
1SA 9:1 And there was a man of Benjamin, that was called Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, the son of a man that was called Benjamin, a strong man in bodily might.
1SA 9:2 And to him was a son, Saul by name, chosen and goodly; and no man of the sons of Israel was better than he; from the shoulders and above, he appeared over all the people.
1SA 9:3 And the she-asses of Kish, the father of Saul, were lost. And Kish said to Saul his son, Take with thee one of the children, and rise thou, and go seek the she-asses.
1SA 9:4 And when they had gone forth by the hill of Ephraim, and by the land of Shalisha, and they had not found them, they passed forth also by the land of Shalim, and they were not there; but also they passed by the land of Benjamin, and yet they found them not.
1SA 9:5 And when they had come into the land of Zuph, and had not found them, Saul said to his child that was with him, Come thou, and turn we again; lest peradventure my father hath left off caring about the female asses, and is busy for us.
1SA 9:6 And the child said to him, Lo! a man of God is in this city, a noble man; all thing that he speaketh, cometh without doubt. Now therefore go we thither, if peradventure he show to us of our way, for which we came.
1SA 9:7 And Saul said to his child, Lo! we shall go there; what shall we bear to the man of God? Bread hath failed in our scrips, and we have no present, that we can give to the man of God, neither any other thing.
1SA 9:8 Again the child answered to Saul, and said, Lo! the fourth part of a stater, that is, a shekel, of silver is found in mine hand; give we it to the man of God, that he show to us our way.
1SA 9:9 Sometime in Israel each man going to counsel with God spake thus, Come ye, and go we to the seer; for he, that is said now a prophet, was called sometime a seer.
1SA 9:10 And Saul said to his child, Thy word is the best; come thou, go we. And they went into the city, in which the man of God was.
1SA 9:11 And when they went up into the highness of the city, they found damsels going out to draw water, and they said to the damsels, Whether the seer is here?
1SA 9:12 And the damsels answered, and said to them, He is here; lo! he is before thee; haste thou now, for today he came into the city; for today is sacrifice of the people in the high place.
1SA 9:13 Ye shall enter into the city, and at once ye shall find him, before that he ascend [[or go up]] into the high place to eat; for the people shall not eat till he come, for he shall first bless the sacrifice, and afterward they shall eat that be called. Now therefore go ye up, for today ye shall find him.
1SA 9:14 And they went up into the city. And when they went into the midst of the city, Samuel appeared going out against them, that he should go up into the high place.
1SA 9:15 And the day before that Saul came, the Lord made revelation in the ear of Samuel, and said,
1SA 9:16 In this same hour which is now, tomorrow, I shall send to thee a man of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him duke upon my people Israel, and he shall save my people from the hands of Philistines; for I have beheld my people, forsooth their cry hath come to me.
1SA 9:17 And when Samuel had beheld Saul, the Lord said to Samuel, Lo! the man, whom I said to thee; this man shall be lord of my people.
1SA 9:18 And Saul nighed to Samuel in the midst of the gate, and said, I pray thee, show thou to me, where is the house of the seer?
1SA 9:19 And Samuel answered to Saul, and said, I am the seer; go thou up before me into the high place, that thou eat with me today, and I shall deliver thee in the morrowtide, and I shall show to thee all things that be in thine heart.
1SA 9:20 And be thou not busy of the female asses, which thou lostest the third day ago, for those [[or they]] be found; and whose shall be all the best things of Israel, whether not to thee, and to all the house of thy father?
1SA 9:21 And Saul answered, and said, Whether I am not a son of Benjamin, of the least lineage of Israel, and my kindred is the last among all the meines of the lineage of Benjamin? Why therefore hast thou spoken to me this word?
1SA 9:22 And so Samuel took Saul, and his child, and led them into the chamber of three orders of seats, or benches, and he gave to them a place in the beginning of them that were called, or bidden to the meat; for they were as thirty men.
1SA 9:23 And Samuel said to the cook, Give thou the part which I gave to thee, and commanded, that thou shouldest keep by itself with thee.
1SA 9:24 And the cook took up a shoulder, and he set [[or put]] it before Saul. And Samuel said, Lo! that, that hath been left, take before thee, and eat; for of this purpose it was kept to thee, when I called the people hither. And Saul ate with Samuel that day.
1SA 9:25 And they came down from the high place into the city; and Samuel spake with Saul in the solar, and Saul arrayed a bed in the solar, and slept.
1SA 9:26 And when they had risen early, and the day began to be clear, Samuel called Saul into the solar, and said, Rise thou up, that I deliver thee. And Saul rose up, and both went out, that is, he, and Samuel.
1SA 9:27 And when they went down into the last part of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Say thou to the child, that he go before us, and pass [[forth]]; forsooth stand thou [[still]] a little, that I show to thee the word of the Lord.
1SA 10:1 Forsooth Samuel took a vessel of oil, and he poured it out on the head of Saul, and kissed him, and said, Lo! the Lord hath anointed thee into prince on his heritage;
1SA 10:2 when thou shalt go from me today, thou shalt find two men beside the sepulchre of Rachel, in the ends of Benjamin, in midday; and they shall say to thee, The female asses be found, which thou wentest to seek; and while the asses be left off caring about, thy father is now busy for you, and saith, What shall I do of my son?
1SA 10:3 And when thou hast gone from thence, and hast passed further, and hast come to the oak of Tabor, three men, going up to God into Bethel, shall find thee there, one man bearing three kids, and another man bearing three cakes of bread, and another man bearing a gallon of wine.
1SA 10:4 And when they have greeted thee, they shall give to thee two loaves, and thou shalt take those of their hand.
1SA 10:5 After these things thou shalt come into the hill of the Lord, where is the standing place, that is, the forcelet, of Philistines; and when thou shalt enter into the city, there thou shalt have meeting thee a flock, or a company, of prophets, coming down from the high place, and a psaltery, and a tympan, and a pipe, and an harp before them, and them prophesying.
1SA 10:6 And the Spirit of the Lord shall at once fall into thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and thou shalt be changed into another man.
1SA 10:7 Therefore when all these signs befall to thee, do thou, whatever things thine hand findeth, for the Lord is with thee.
1SA 10:8 And thou shalt go down before me into Gilgal; for I shall come down to thee, to offer an offering, and sacrifice peaceable sacrifices; by seven days thou shalt abide, till I come to thee, and show thee what thou shalt do.
1SA 10:9 Therefore when Saul had turned away his shoulder to go from Samuel, God exchanged another heart to Saul, and all these signs came in that day.
1SA 10:10 And Saul and his child came to the foresaid hill, and lo! a company of prophets were meeting with him; and the Spirit of the Lord fell at once upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the prophets.
1SA 10:11 And all men, that knew Saul yesterday and the third day ago, saw that he was with the prophets, and that he prophesied, and they said together, What thing hath befallen to the son of Kish? Whether also Saul is among [[the]] prophets?
1SA 10:12 And one man answered to another, and said, And who is the father of them? Therefore it was turned into a proverb, Whether also Saul is among the prophets?
1SA 10:13 And Saul ceased to prophesy, and he came to an high place.
1SA 10:14 And the brother of Saul’s father said to him, and to his child, Whither went ye? And they answered, To seek [[the]] she-asses; and when we found them not, we came to Samuel.
1SA 10:15 And the brother of Saul’s father said to him, Show thou to me what Samuel said to thee.
1SA 10:16 And Saul said to his uncle, Samuel showed to us, that the she-asses were found. But he showed not to his uncle of the word of the realm, that Samuel spake to him.
1SA 10:17 And Samuel called together the people to the Lord in Mizpeh;
1SA 10:18 and he said to the sons of Israel, The Lord God of Israel saith these things, I led Israel out of the land of Egypt, and I delivered you from the hand of Egyptians, and from the hand of all the kings that tormented you.
1SA 10:19 And today ye have cast away your Lord God, which alone saved you from all your evils and [[your]] tribulations; and ye [[have]] said, Nay, but ordain thou a king upon us. Now therefore stand ye before the Lord by your lineages, and by meines.
1SA 10:20 And Samuel set together all the lineages of Israel, and [[the]] lot felled upon the lineage of Benjamin.
1SA 10:21 And he set together the lineage of Benjamin, and the meines thereof; and lot felled upon the meine of Matri, and it came unto Saul, the son of Kish. Therefore they sought him, and he was not found there.
1SA 10:22 And after these things they counselled with the Lord, whether Saul should come thither. And the Lord answered, Lo! he is hid among vessels.
1SA 10:23 Therefore they ran, and took him from thence; and he stood in the middle of the people, and [[he]] was higher than all the people from the shoulder[[s]] and above.
1SA 10:24 And Samuel said to all the people, Certainly ye see whom the Lord hath chosen; for none in all the people is like him. And all the people cried, and said, Live the king!
1SA 10:25 And Samuel spake to the people the law of the realm, and he wrote it in a book, and put it up before the Lord. And Samuel delivered all the people, each man into his house;
1SA 10:26 but also Saul went into his house in Gibeah; and a part of the host went with him, whose hearts God had touched.
1SA 10:27 And the sons of Belial said, Whether this man may save us? And they despised him, and brought not gifts, that is, presents, to him; and he let it go as though he heard it not.
1SA 11:1 And it was done as after a month, Nahash of Ammon went up, and began to fight against Jabesh of Gilead. And all the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, Have thou us bound in peace, and we shall serve thee.
1SA 11:2 And Nahash of Ammon answered to them, In this I shall smite bond of peace with you, that I put out the right eyes of all you, and that I put you to be reproof in all Israel.
1SA 11:3 And the elder men of Jabesh said to him, Grant thou to us seven days, that we send messengers to all the coasts of Israel; and if none be that defend us, we shall go out to thee.
1SA 11:4 Then messengers came into Gibeah of Saul, and spake these words, while the people heard; and all the people raised their voice, and wept.
1SA 11:5 And lo! Saul came from the field, and he pursued [[or following] [the]] oxen; and he said, What hath the people, for it weepeth? And they told to him the words of the men of Jabesh.
1SA 11:6 And the Spirit of the Lord fell at once into Saul, when he had heard these words, and his fierce wrath was greatly stirred.
1SA 11:7 And he took ever either ox, and he cut them into gobbets, and he sent those into all the coasts of Israel, by the hands of messengers; and he said, Whoever goeth not out, and pursueth [[or followed]] not Saul and Samuel, so it shall be done to his oxen. Therefore the dread of the Lord went into the people, and they went out as one man.
1SA 11:8 And Saul numbered them in Bezek; and three hundred thousand were there of the sons of Israel; and of the men of Judah were thirty thousand.
1SA 11:9 And they said to the messengers that came, Thus ye shall say to the men that be in Jabesh of Gilead, Tomorrow shall be health to you, when the sun is hot. Then the messengers came, and told to the men of Jabesh; the which were glad,
1SA 11:10 and said to Ammon, Early we shall go out to you, and ye shall do to us all that pleaseth to you.
1SA 11:11 And it was done, when the morrowtide came, Saul ordained the people into three parts; and he entered into the middle tents in the waking of the morrowtide, and he smote Ammon till the day was hot; forsooth the residues were scattered, so that twain together were not left in them.
1SA 11:12 And the people said to Samuel, Who is this, that said, Saul shall not reign upon us? Give ye up the men, and we shall slay them.
1SA 11:13 And Saul said, No man shall be slain in this day, for today the Lord hath made health in Israel.
1SA 11:14 And Samuel said to the people, Come ye, and go we into Gilgal, and renew we there the realm.
1SA 11:15 And all the people went into Gilgal, and there they made Saul king before the Lord in Gilgal; and they offered there peaceable sacrifices before the Lord. And Saul was glad there, and all the men of Israel greatly.
1SA 12:1 Forsooth Samuel said to all Israel, Lo! I [[have]] heard your voice by all things which ye spake to me, and I [[have]] ordained a king upon you;
1SA 12:2 and now the king goeth before you. And I have waxed eld and hoary; and my sons be with you; also I have lived before you from my young waxing age unto this day.
1SA 12:3 And lo! I am ready; speak ye to me before the Lord, and before the christ of him or his anointed, or king; whether I have taken any man’s ox, either his ass; if I have falsely challenged any man; if I have oppressed any man; if I have taken gift of any man’s hand; I shall despise it today, and I shall restore to you.
1SA 12:4 And they said, Thou hast not falsely challenged us, neither thou hast oppressed us, neither thou hast taken anything of any man’s hand.
1SA 12:5 And he said to them, The Lord is witness against you, and his christ, or his anointed, or king, is witness in this day; for ye have not found any-thing in mine hand. And they said, He is witness.
1SA 12:6 And Samuel said to the people, The Lord, that made Moses and Aaron, and that led your fathers out of the land of Egypt, is present;
1SA 12:7 now therefore stand ye, that I strive by doom against you before the Lord, of all the mercies of the Lord, which he did with you, and with your fathers.
1SA 12:8 How that Jacob entered into Egypt, and your fathers cried to the Lord; and the Lord sent Moses and Aaron, and led your fathers out of Egypt, and hath set them in this place.
1SA 12:9 Which forgat their Lord God; and he betook them into the hand of Sisera, master of the chivalry of Hazor, and in the hand of Philistines, and in the hand of the king of Moab; and they fought against them.
1SA 12:10 And after this your fathers cried to the Lord, and said, We have sinned, for we forsook the Lord, and served Baalim and Ashtaroth; now therefore deliver thou us from the hand of our enemies, and we shall serve thee.
1SA 12:11 And the Lord sent Jerubbaal, that is Gideon, and Bedan, that is, Samson, and Barak, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you from the hand of your enemies by compass; and then ye dwelled securely.
1SA 12:12 And ye saw, that Nahash, the king of the sons of Ammon, came against you; and ye said to me, counselling you to ask none other king than God, Nay, but a king shall command to us; when your Lord God reigned in you.
1SA 12:13 Now therefore your king is ready, whom ye have chosen and asked for; lo! the Lord hath given to you a king.
1SA 12:14 If ye dread the Lord, and serve him, and hear his voice, and wrath not the mouth of the Lord; ye and your king, that commandeth to you, shall pursue [[or following]] your Lord God.
1SA 12:15 Forsooth if ye hear not the voice of the Lord, but wrath his word, the hand of the Lord shall be on you, and on your fathers.
1SA 12:16 But also now stand ye, and see this great thing, that the Lord shall do in your sight.
1SA 12:17 Whether harvest of wheat is not today? I shall inwardly call the Lord, and he shall give voices, that is, thunders, and rains; and ye shall know, and see, for ye asking a king upon you, ye have done grievous evil to yourself in the sight of the Lord.
1SA 12:18 And Samuel cried to the Lord, and the Lord gave thunders and rains in that day. And all the people dreaded greatly the Lord and Samuel;
1SA 12:19 and all the people said to Samuel, Pray thou for thy servants to thy Lord God, that we die not; for we [[have]] added evil to all our sins, that we ask a king to us.
1SA 12:20 And Samuel said to the people, Dread ye not; ye have done all this evil; nevertheless go ye not away from following the back of the Lord, but serve ye the Lord in all your heart;
1SA 12:21 and do not ye bow after vain things, that shall not profit you, neither they shall deliver you; for those [[or they]] be vain things.
1SA 12:22 And then the Lord shall not forsake his people for his great name; for the Lord hath sworn to make you a people to himself.
1SA 12:23 And this sin be far from me against the Lord, that I cease to pray for you; and I shall teach you a rightful [[or right]] way and a good.
1SA 12:24 Therefore dread ye the Lord, and serve ye him in truth, and of all your heart; for ye saw those great things, that he hath done to you;
1SA 12:25 that if ye continue in malice, both ye and your king shall perish altogether.
1SA 13:1 Saul was a son of one year, that is, as innocent and clean of sin as a child of one year, when he began to reign; and he reigned upon Israel two and twenty years.
1SA 13:2 And Saul chose to him three thousand men of Israel, and two thousand of them were with Saul in Michmash, in the hill of Bethel; and a thousand were with his son Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin; soothly he sent again the tother people each man into his tabernacle.
1SA 13:3 And Jonathan smote the station, that is, forcelet, either stronghold, of Philistines, that was in Geba. And when Philistines had heard this, Saul sounded with a clarion in all the land, and said, Hebrews, hear.
1SA 13:4 And all Israel heard such a fame, that Saul smote the station of Philistines; and Israel raised up himself against the Philistines; then the people cried after Saul in Gilgal.
1SA 13:5 And the Philistines were gathered together to fight against Israel; thirty thousand of chariots, and six thousand of knights, and the tother common people, as gravel which is full much in the brink of the sea; and they went up, and setted their tents in Mich-mash, at the east coast of Bethaven.
1SA 13:6 And when [[the]] men of Israel had seen, that they were set in straitness, for the people was tormented, they hid themselves in dens, and in privy places, and in stones, and in ditches, and in cisterns.
1SA 13:7 And the men of Hebrews passed over Jordan, into the land of Gad and of Gilead. And when Saul was yet in Gilgal, all the people was afeared that pursued [[or followed]] him.
1SA 13:8 And seven days he abode Samuel by [[the]] covenant, and Samuel came not into Gilgal; and the people went away from Saul.
1SA 13:9 Therefore Saul said, Bring ye to me burnt sacrifice, and peaceable offerings; and he offered burnt sacrifice.
1SA 13:10 And when he had ended offering the burnt sacrifice, lo! Samuel came; and Saul went out against him, to greet him.
1SA 13:11 And Samuel said to Saul, What hast thou done? Saul answered, Lo! for I saw that the people went away from me, and thou camest not by the days of covenant; and the Philistines were gathered together in Michmash;
1SA 13:12 I said, Now Philistines shall come down to me in Gilgal, and I have not pleased the face of the Lord; I was compelled by need, and I offered burnt sacrifice to the Lord.
1SA 13:13 And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done follily, and thou hast not kept the behests of thy Lord God, which he commanded to thee; and if thou haddest not done this thing, right now the Lord had made ready thy realm upon Israel without end;
1SA 13:14 but thy realm shall not rise further. The Lord hath sought a man to himself after his heart; and the Lord hath commanded to him, that he should be duke on his people, for thou keptest not those things which the Lord commanded.
1SA 13:15 And Samuel rose, and went up from Gilgal into Gibeah of Benjamin; and the people that were left went up after Saul against the people that fought against them; and they came from Gilgal into Gibeah, in the hill of Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people, that were found with him, as six hundred men.
1SA 13:16 And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that was found with them, was in Gibeah of Benjamin; and the Philistines sat together in Michmash.
1SA 13:17 And three companies went out of the Philistines’ tents to take prey; one company went against the way of Ophrah, to the land of Shual;
1SA 13:18 and another company entered by the way of Bethhoron; and the third company turned itself to the way of the term in the land of Diba; and that term nigheth to the valley of Zeboim against the desert.
1SA 13:19 And none ironsmith was found in all the land of Israel; for the Philistines were wary, either eschewed, lest per-adventure the Hebrews made sword either spear.
1SA 13:20 Therefore all Israel went down to the Philistines, that each man should sharpen his share, and his pickaxe, and his ax, and his cutting hook;
1SA 13:21 for all the edges of their shares were blunt, and of their pickaxes, and of their three-toothed forks, and of axes, unto a prick to be amended.
1SA 13:22 And when the day of battle came, no sword nor spear was found in the hand of all the people that was with Saul and Jonathan, except Saul, and Jonathan his son.
1SA 13:23 Forsooth the station of Philistines went out, that it should pass into Michmash.
1SA 14:1 And it befelled in a day, that Jonathan, the son of Saul, said to his squire, a young man, Come thou, and pass we to the station of the Philistines, which is beyond that place; soothly he showed not this same thing to his father.
1SA 14:2 And Saul dwelled in the last part of Gibeah, under a pomegranate tree, that was in the field of Gibeah; and the people as of six hundred men was with him.
1SA 14:3 And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub, [[the]] brother of Ichabod, the son of Phinehas, that was engendered of Eli, the priest of the Lord in Shiloh, bare the ephod, that is, the priest’s cloth; but also the people knew not whither Jonathan had gone.
1SA 14:4 And betwixt the goings up, by which Jonathan enforced or endeavour-ed to pass to the station of Philistines, were stones standing forth on ever either side, and scars broken before, by the manner of teeth, on each side; name to the one was Bozez, and name to the tother was Seneh;
1SA 14:5 one scar was standing forth to the north against Michmash, and the tother scar to the south against Gibeah.
1SA 14:6 And Jonathan said to his young squire, Come thou, pass we to the station of these uncircumcised men, if in hap the Lord do for us; for it is not hard to the Lord to save, either in many, either in few.
1SA 14:7 And his squire said to him, Do thou all things that please thy soul; go whither thou covetest, I shall be with thee, wherever thou wilt.
1SA 14:8 And Jonathan said, Lo! we pass to these men; and when we appear to them,
1SA 14:9 if they speak thus to us, Dwell ye, till we come to you; stand we in our place, and go we not up to them.
1SA 14:10 And if they say, Go ye up to us; go we up to them, for the Lord hath betaken them into our hands; this shall be a sign to us.
1SA 14:11 Therefore ever either appeared to the station of Philistines; and the Philistines said, Lo! the Hebrews go out of [[the]] caves, in which they were hid.
1SA 14:12 And men of the station spake to Jonathan and to his squire, and said, Go ye up to us, and we shall show to you a thing. And Jonathan said to his squire, Wend we up to them, pursue [[or follow]] thou me; for the Lord hath betaken them into the hands of Israel.
1SA 14:13 And Jonathan went up, creeping on hands and feet, and his squire after him; and when they had seen the face of Jonathan, some felled down before Jonathan, his squire killed others, and pursued [[or following]] him.
1SA 14:14 And the first wound was made, which Jonathan and his squire smote, as of twenty men, in the middle part of land, which a pair of oxen was wont to ear in the day.
1SA 14:15 And a miracle was done in the Philistines’ tents, and by their fields, but also all the people of the Philistines’ station that went out to take prey, dreaded, and their tents were troubled; and it befelled as a miracle of God.
1SA 14:16 And the espyers of Saul beheld this doing, that were in Gibeah of Benjamin, and lo! a multitude of the Philistines was cast down, and fleeing away hither and thither.
1SA 14:17 And Saul said to the people that were with him, Seek ye, and see ye, who went away from us. And when they had sought, it was found, that Jonathan and his squire were not present.
1SA 14:18 And Saul said to Ahiah, Bring hither the ark of the Lord; for the ark of God was there in that time with the sons of Israel.
1SA 14:19 And when Saul spake to the priest, a great noise arose in the tents of the Philistines; and it increased little and little, and it sounded more clearly. And Saul said to the priest, Withdraw thine hand.
1SA 14:20 Therefore Saul cried, and all the people that was with him; and they came unto the place of battle, and, lo! the sword of each man was turned to his neighbour, and a full great slaying was.
1SA 14:21 But also the Hebrews that were with Philistines yesterday and the third day ago, and had gone up with them into their tents, turned again to be with the men of Israel, that were with Saul and Jonathan.
1SA 14:22 Also all the men of Israel, that had hid themselves in the hill of Ephraim, heard that the Philistines had fled; and they fellowshipped them-selves with their men in [[the]] battle, and as ten thousand of men were with Saul.
1SA 14:23 And the Lord saved Israel in that day. And the battle came till to Bethaven.
1SA 14:24 And men of Israel were fellow-shipped to themselves in that day; forsooth Saul swore to the people, and said, Cursed be the man that eateth bread till to eventide, till I avenge me of mine enemies. And all the people ate no bread.
1SA 14:25 And all the common people of the land came into a forest, in which was honey on the face of earth.
1SA 14:26 And so the people entered into the forest, and flowing honey appeared; and no man put his hand to his mouth thereof, for the people dreaded the oath.
1SA 14:27 And Jonathan heard not, when his father forbade this to the people; and Jonathan held forth the end of a little rod, that he held in his hand, and he dipped it into an honeycomb; and he turned his hand to his mouth, and his eyes were lightened.
1SA 14:28 And one of the people answered, and said, Thy father bound the people with an oath, and said, Cursed be the man that eateth bread today. And the people was faint.
1SA 14:29 And Jonathan said, My father hath troubled the land; ye see, that mine eyes be lightened, for I tasted a little of this honey;
1SA 14:30 how much more if the people had eaten of the prey of their enemies, that they found; whether not greater vengeance had been made in [[the]] Philistines?
1SA 14:31 Therefore they smote [[the]] Philistines in that day from Michmash into Aijalon. And the people was made full weary;
1SA 14:32 and the people turned to [[the]] prey, and took sheep and oxen, and calves; and they killed these beasts upon the earth; and the people ate the flesh with blood.
1SA 14:33 And they told to Saul, and said, that the people eating with blood had sinned to the Lord. And Saul said, Ye have trespassed; wallow ye anon to me a great stone.
1SA 14:34 And Saul said, Go ye forth abroad into the common people, and say ye to them, that each man bring to me his ox and his wether; and slay ye those upon this stone, and eat ye them, and ye shall not do sin to the Lord, eating them with blood. And so all the people brought each man an ox in his hand unto the night, and they killed them there.
1SA 14:35 And Saul builded there an altar to the Lord; and then first he began to build an altar to the Lord.
1SA 14:36 And Saul said, Fall we upon the Philistines in the night, and waste or destroy we them till the morrowtide shine; and leave we not of them a man alive. And the people said, Do thou all thing that seemeth good to thee in thine eyes. And the priest said, Nigh we hither to God.
1SA 14:37 And Saul counselled with the Lord, and said, Whether I shall pursue the Philistines? whether thou shalt betake them into the hands of Israel? And the Lord answered not to him in that day.
1SA 14:38 And Saul said, Bring ye hither all the corners, or the uttermost parties, or chiefs, of the people, and know ye, and see ye, by whom this sin hath fallen today.
1SA 14:39 The Lord the saviour of Israel liveth; for if it is done by Jonathan my son, he shall die without again-drawing. At which oath no man of all the people against-said him.
1SA 14:40 And he said to all Israel, Be ye separated into one part, and I with my son Jonathan shall be in the tother part. And the people answered to Saul, Do thou that, that seemeth good to thine eyes.
1SA 14:41 And Saul said to the Lord God of Israel, Lord God of Israel, give thou doom, what is it, that thou answerest not today to thy servant? If this wicked-ness is in me, either in Jonathan, my son, make thou showing thereof; either if this wickedness is in thy people, give thou holiness. And Jonathan was taken, and Saul, by lot; forsooth the people went out.
1SA 14:42 And Saul said, Send ye lot be-twixt me and Jonathan my son. And Jonathan was taken.
1SA 14:43 And Saul said to Jonathan, Show thou to me, what thou didest. And Jonathan showed to him, and said, I tasting tasted a little of honey in the end of the rod, that was in mine hand; and lo! I die.
1SA 14:44 And Saul said, God do to me these things, and add these things, for thou, Jonathan, shalt die by death.
1SA 14:45 And the people said to Saul, Therefore whether Jonathan shall die, that did this great health in Israel? this is unleaveful; the Lord liveth; none hair of his head shall fall into the earth; for he hath wrought with God today. Therefore the people delivered Jonathan, that he died not.
1SA 14:46 And Saul went away, and he pursued not the Philistines; and the Philistines went into their places.
1SA 14:47 And Saul, when his realm was stabled upon Israel, fought by compass against all his enemies, against Moab, and the sons of Ammon, and Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines; and whither ever he turned him[[self]], he overcame.
1SA 14:48 And when his host was gathered together, he smote Amalek; and delivered Israel from the hand of his destroyers.
1SA 14:49 And the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchishua; the names of his two daughters be these, the name of the first engendered daughter was Merab, and the name of the younger was Michal.
1SA 14:50 And the name of Saul’s wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz; and the name of the prince of his chivalry was Abner, the son of Ner, the brother of the father of Saul.
1SA 14:51 And Kish was the father of Saul; and Ner, the son of Abiel, was the father of Abner.
1SA 14:52 Soothly mighty battle was against Philistines in all the days of Saul; for whomever Saul saw to be a strong man, and shapely to battle, he fellow-shipped to himself that man.
1SA 15:1 And Samuel said to Saul, The Lord sent me, that I should anoint thee into king on his people Israel; now therefore hear thou the voice of the Lord.
1SA 15:2 The Lord of hosts saith these things, I have brought to mind what-ever things Amalek hath done to Israel; how Amalek against-stood Israel in the way, when Israel went up from Egypt.
1SA 15:3 Now therefore go thou, and slay Amalek, and destroy thou all his things; spare thou not him, nor covet thou anything of his things; but slay thou from man unto woman, and little child, and sucking, ox, and sheep, and camel, and ass.
1SA 15:4 And so Saul commanded the people to be gathered together, and he numbered them as lambs, two hundred thousand of footmen, and ten thousand of men of Judah.
1SA 15:5 And when Saul came to the city of Amalek, he made ready ambush-ments in the dry bed of the strand [[or stream]].
1SA 15:6 And Saul said to Kenites, Go ye, depart ye, and go ye away from Amalek, lest peradventure I wrap thee in with them; for thou didest mercy with all the sons of Israel, when they went up from Egypt. And Kenites departed from the midst of Amalek.
1SA 15:7 And Saul smote Amalek, from Havilah, till thou come to Shur, which is even against Egypt.
1SA 15:8 And Saul took Agag alive, the king of Amalek; and he killed by sharpness of sword all the common people.
1SA 15:9 And Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best flocks of sheep, and of great beasts, and clothes, and rams, and all things that were fair; and they would not destroy those [[or them]]; but whatever thing was vile, and reprovable, they destroyed that thing.
1SA 15:10 Forsooth the word of the Lord was made to Samuel, and said,
1SA 15:11 It repenteth me, that I made Saul king; for he hath forsaken me, and hath not fulfilled my words in work. And Samuel was sorry, and he cried to the Lord in all that night.
1SA 15:12 And when Samuel had risen up by night to go early to Saul, it was told to Samuel, that Saul had come into Carmel, and had raised up to him a sign of victory; and that he had turned again from Amalek, and had passed forth, and had gone down into Gilgal.
1SA 15:13 Then Samuel came to Saul, and Saul offered burnt sacrifice to the Lord of the chief things of the preys, which he had brought from Amalek. And the while Samuel came to Saul, Saul said to him, Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have [[ful]] filled the word of the Lord.
1SA 15:14 And Samuel said, And what is this voice of flocks, that soundeth in mine ears, and of great beasts, which I hear?
1SA 15:15 And Saul said, They brought those from Amalek; for the people spared the best sheep and great beasts, that those should be offered to thy Lord God; and we killed the tother beasts.
1SA 15:16 And Samuel said to Saul, Suffer thou me, and I shall show to thee what things the Lord hath spoken to me in this night. And Saul said to Samuel, Speak thou.
1SA 15:17 And Samuel said, Whether not, when thou were little in thine own eyes, thou were made head in the lineages of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee into king on Israel;
1SA 15:18 and the Lord sent thee into the way, and said, Go thou, and slay the sinners of Amalek, and thou shalt fight against them till to the slaying of them.
1SA 15:19 Why therefore heardest thou not the voice of the Lord, but thou were turned to the prey, and didest evil in the eyes of the Lord?
1SA 15:20 And Saul said to Samuel, Yes, I heard the voice of the Lord, and I have gone in the way, by which the Lord sent me, and I have brought Agag, the king of Amalek, and I have killed Amalek.
1SA 15:21 Forsooth the people took of the prey, sheep and oxen, the first fruits or the chief fruits of those things that be slain, that they make sacrifice to their Lord God in Gilgal.
1SA 15:22 And Samuel said, Whether the Lord will or desireth burnt sacrifices, either slain sacrifices, and not more, rather, that men obey to the voice of the Lord? Forsooth obedience to him is better than sacrifices, and to take heed to his word is more than to offer the inner fatness of rams;
1SA 15:23 for it is as the sin of maumetry to fight against God’s behest, and it is as the wickedness of idolatry to not assent to God’s behest. Therefore for that, that thou castedest away the word of the Lord, the Lord casted thee away, that thou be not king.
1SA 15:24 And Saul said to Samuel, I have sinned, for I have broken the word of the Lord, and thy words; and I dreaded the people, and obeyed to the voice of them;
1SA 15:25 but now, I beseech thee, bear thou my sin, and turn thou again with me, that I worship the Lord.
1SA 15:26 And Samuel said to Saul, I shall not turn again with thee, for thou castedest away the word of the Lord, and the Lord hath cast away thee, that thou be not king upon Israel.
1SA 15:27 And Samuel turned to go away; soothly Saul took the end of the mantle of Samuel, which also was rent.
1SA 15:28 And Samuel said to him, The Lord hath cut the realm of Israel from thee today, and he hath given it to thy neighbour, better than thou;
1SA 15:29 certainly the Overcomer in Israel shall not spare them that will not obey to him, and he shall not be bowed by repentance; for he is not man, that is, changeable, that he do repentance.
1SA 15:30 And Saul said, I have sinned; but now honour thou me before the elder men of my people, and before Israel, and turn thou again with me, that I worship thy Lord God.
1SA 15:31 Therefore Samuel turned again, and followed Saul, and Saul worshipped the Lord.
1SA 15:32 And Samuel said, Bring ye to me Agag, the king of Amalek. And Agag, most fat and trembling, was brought to him. And Agag said, Whether thus departeth bitter death?
1SA 15:33 And Samuel said, As thy sword hath made women without free children, so thy mother shall be without free children among women. And Samuel hewed Agag into gobbets before the Lord in Gilgal.
1SA 15:34 And Samuel went into Ramah; and Saul went up into his house in Gibeah.
1SA 15:35 And Samuel saw no more Saul unto the day of his death; nevertheless Samuel bewailed Saul, for it repented the Lord, that he had ordained Saul king upon Israel.
1SA 16:1 And the Lord said to Samuel, How long bewailest thou Saul, since I have cast him away, that he reign not upon Israel; fill thine horn with oil, and come, that I send thee to Jesse of Bethlehem; for among his sons I have purveyed a king to me.
1SA 16:2 And Samuel said, How shall I go? for Saul shall hear, and he shall slay me. And the Lord said, Thou shalt take a calf of the drove in thy hand, and thou shalt say, I came to make sacrifice to the Lord.
1SA 16:3 And thou shalt call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I shall show to thee, what thou shalt do; and thou shalt anoint whomever I shall show to thee.
1SA 16:4 Then Samuel did, as the Lord spake to him; and he came into Bethlehem, and the elder men of the city wondered, and came to him, and said, Whether thine entry be peaceable?
1SA 16:5 And he said, It is peaceable; I came to make sacrifice to the Lord; be ye hallowed, and come ye with me, that I make sacrifice. Therefore he hallowed Jesse, and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.
1SA 16:6 And when they had entered, he saw Eliab, and said, in his heart, Whether before the Lord is his christ, or his anointed?
1SA 16:7 And the Lord said to Samuel, Behold thou not his cheer, neither the highness of his stature; for I have cast him away, and I deem not by man’s sight; for man seeth those things that be open, but the Lord beholdeth the heart.
1SA 16:8 And Jesse called Abinadab, and brought him before Samuel; and he said, Neither the Lord hath chosen this.
1SA 16:9 And Jesse brought forth Shammah; of whom Samuel said, Also the Lord hath not chosen this.
1SA 16:10 And so Jesse brought forth his seven sons before Samuel; and Samuel said to Jesse, The Lord hath chosen none of these.
1SA 16:11 And Samuel said to Jesse, Whether thy sons be now filled? And Jesse answered, Yet there is another little child, and he pastureth sheep. And Samuel said to Jesse, Send ye, and bring him hither; for we shall not sit to meat, before that he come hither.
1SA 16:12 Therefore Jesse sent, and brought him; soothly he was ruddy, and fair in sight, and of seemly face. And the Lord said, Rise thou, and anoint him; for it is he.
1SA 16:13 Therefore Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren; and the Spirit of the Lord was dressed [[or full sent]] into David from that day forth. And Samuel rose up, and went into Ramah.
1SA 16:14 And so the Spirit of the Lord went away from Saul, and a wicked spirit of the Lord travailed Saul.
1SA 16:15 And the servants of Saul said to him, Lo! an evil spirit of the Lord travaileth thee;
1SA 16:16 our lord the king command, and thy servants, that be before thee, shall seek a man, that can sing with an harp, and when the evil spirit of the Lord taketh thee, he harp with his hand, and thou bear it more easily.
1SA 16:17 And Saul said to his servants, Purvey ye to me some man singing well, and bring ye him to me.
1SA 16:18 And one of his children answered and said, Lo! I saw a son of Jesse of Bethlehem, knowing how to sing, and most strong man, and a man able to battle, and prudent in words, and a fair man; and the Lord is with him.
1SA 16:19 Therefore Saul sent messengers to Jesse, and said, Send thou to me David thy son, that is keeping thy beasts.
1SA 16:20 And so Jesse took an ass charged with loaves, and a gallon of wine, and a goat kid; and he sent those by the hand of David his son to Saul.
1SA 16:21 And David came to Saul, and stood before him; and Saul loved him greatly, and he was made his squire.
1SA 16:22 And Saul sent to Jesse, and said, David stand in my sight, for he hath found grace in mine eyes.
1SA 16:23 Then whenever the evil spirit of the Lord travailed Saul, David took his harp, and harped with his hand, and Saul was comforted, and he had it more lightly; for the evil spirit went away from him.
1SA 17:1 Soothly the Philistines gathered together their companies into battle, and came together in Shochoh of Judah, and they setted tents betwixt Shochoh and Azekah, in the coasts of Dammim or Ephesdammim.
1SA 17:2 And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and came into the valley of Terebinth, and they dressed battle array to fight against [[the]] Philistines.
1SA 17:3 And the Philistines stood above the hill on this part, and Israel stood on the hill on the tother part of the valley, that was betwixt them.
1SA 17:4 And a man in the midst, that is, a strong man, and hardy, that goeth before the host, and is ready to fight against one of the enemies in singular battle, that is, man-to-man, went out of the Philistines’ tents, Goliath by name, of Gath, of six cubits high and a span;
1SA 17:5 and a brazen basinet on his head; and he was clothed with a mailed habergeon; and the weight of his habergeon was five thousand shekels of brass;
1SA 17:6 and he had on his thighs brazen boots, and a brazen shield covered his shoulders.
1SA 17:7 Forsooth the shaft of his spear was as the beam of webs; and the iron of his spear weighed six hundred shekels of iron; and his squire went before him.
1SA 17:8 And he stood, and cried against the companies of armed men of Israel, and said to them, Why came ye ready to battle? Whether I am not a Philistine, and ye be the servants of Saul? Choose ye a man of you, and come he down to a singular battle, that is, man-to-man;
1SA 17:9 if he may fight with me, and slay me, we shall be your servants; forsooth if I have the mastery, and slay him, ye shall be bond, and serve us.
1SA 17:10 And the Philistine said, I have said shame today to the companies of Israel; give ye [[to me]] a man, and begin he singular battle with me.
1SA 17:11 Soothly Saul and all men of Israel heard such words of the Philistine, and they were astonied, and dreaded greatly.
1SA 17:12 Forsooth David was the son of a man of Ephrath, of whom it is said before, of Bethlehem of Judah, to whom the name was Jesse, and he had eight sons; and in the days of Saul, Jesse was an old man, and of great age among men.
1SA 17:13 And the three eldest sons of Jesse went after Saul into battle; and the names of his three sons, that went to battle, were Eliab, the first begotten, and the second, Abinadab, and the third, Shammah.
1SA 17:14 And David was the youngest. Then while the three eldest sons pursued [[or following]] Saul,
1SA 17:15 David went, and turned again from Saul, that he should keep the flock of his father in Bethlehem.
1SA 17:16 Forsooth the Philistine came forth in the morrowtide, and [[at]] eventide; and stood by forty days [[or standing and reproving the children of Israel for forty days]].
1SA 17:17 And Jesse said to David his son, Take thou to thy brethren meat made of meal, the measure of ephah, and these ten loaves, and run thou into the tents to thy brethren;
1SA 17:18 and thou shalt bare to the tribune these ten small cheeses; and thou shalt visit thy brethren, whether they do rightly, and learn thou, with which men they be ordained.
1SA 17:19 Forsooth Saul, and they, and all the sons of Israel in the valley of Terebinth fought against the Philistines.
1SA 17:20 And so David rose early, and he betook the flock to a keeper, and he went charged, as Jesse commanded to him; and he came to the place of Magal or the circle of the camp, and to the host, the which host went out to the fight, and it cried [[out]] in the fighting.
1SA 17:21 For Israel had ordained battle array; and even against them, the Philistines were ready also.
1SA 17:22 Then David left the vessels, that he had brought, under the hand of a keeper at the fardels, and he ran to the place of [[the]] battle, and he asked, if all things were done rightly with his brethren.
1SA 17:23 And when he spake yet to them, that bastard [[man]] appeared, Goliath by name, the Philistine of Gath, and he went up from the tents of the Philistines; and while he spake these same words, David heard.
1SA 17:24 And when all the men of Israel had seen the man, they fled from his sight, and dreaded him greatly.
1SA 17:25 And each man of Israel said to other, Whether thou hast seen this man that hath gone up? forsooth he went up to say shame or reproof to Israel; therefore the king shall make rich with great riches the man that slayeth that Philistine; and the king shall give his daughter to that man, and shall make the house of his father without having to pay tribute in Israel.
1SA 17:26 And David spake to the men that stood with him, and said, What shall be given to the man that slayeth this Philistine, and doeth away shame from Israel? for who is this Philistine uncircumcised, that despiseth the battle arrays of God living?
1SA 17:27 Forsooth the people told to him the same word, and said, These things shall be given to the man that slayeth him.
1SA 17:28 And when Eliab, his more brother or the elder brother of David, had heard this, while he spake with other men, he was wroth against David, and said, Why camest thou hither, and why hast thou left those few sheep in desert? I know thy pride, and the waywardness of thine heart; for thou camest down to see the battle.
1SA 17:29 And David said, What have I done? Whether it is not but a word?
1SA 17:30 And David went thence a little from him to another man; and David said the same word, and the people answered to him the word as they did before.
1SA 17:31 And the words were heard, that David spake, and they were told before Saul. And when David was brought to Saul,
1SA 17:32 David spake to him thus, The heart of any man fall not down in him, for I thy servant shall go, and fight against the Philistine.
1SA 17:33 And Saul said to David, Thou mayest not against-stand this Philistine, neither fight against him, for thou art a child; forsooth this man is a warrior from his young waxing age.
1SA 17:34 And David said to Saul, Thy servant kept his father’s flock, and when a lion came, also or either a bear, and took away a ram from the midst of the flock;
1SA 17:35 I pursued, and killed them, and I ravished it from their mouth; and they rose against me, and I took their nether jowl, and I strangled, and killed them.
1SA 17:36 For I thy servant killed both the lion and the bear; therefore and this Philistine uncircumcised shall be as one of them. Now I shall go, and I shall do away the shame or the reproof of the people; for who is this Philistine uncircumcised, that was hardy to curse the host of God living?
1SA 17:37 And again David said, The Lord that delivered me from the mouth of the lion, and from the hand, that is, power, of the bear, he shall deliver me from the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said to David, Go thou, and the Lord be with thee.
1SA 17:38 And Saul clothed David with his clothes, and he set a brazen basinet on his head, and clothed him with an habergeon.
1SA 17:39 Therefore David was girded with his sword on his cloth, and began to assay if he might go armed; for he had not [[the]] custom. And David said to Saul, I may not go thus, for I have not the uses of it. And David put away those [[things]],
1SA 17:40 and he took his staff, that he had ever[[more]] in his hands. And he chose to him five full clear round stones, that is, hard, plain, and round, of the strand [[or stream]]; and he put those [[or them]] into his shepherd’s scrip, that he had with him; and he took a sling in his hand, and he went forth against the Philistine.
1SA 17:41 Soothly the Philistine went, going and nighing against David; and his squire went before him.
1SA 17:42 And when the Philistine had beheld David, and saw him, he despised David; forsooth David was a young waxing man, ruddy, and fair in sight.
1SA 17:43 And the Philistine said to David, Whether I am a dog, for thou comest to me with a staff? And the Philistine cursed David in his gods;
1SA 17:44 and he said to David, Come thou to me, and I shall give thy flesh to the fowls of the air, and to [[the]] beasts of the earth.
1SA 17:45 And David said to Goliath, Thou comest to me with a sword, and spear, and shield; but I come to thee in name of the Lord of hosts, God of the companies of Israel, to whom thou hast said reproof today.
1SA 17:46 And the Lord shall give thee into mine hand, and I shall slay thee, and I shall take thine head from thee; and today I shall give the dead bodies of the tents of Philistines to the fowls of heavens, and to the beasts of the earth; that all the earth know, that the Lord God is in Israel,
1SA 17:47 and that all this church know, that the Lord saveth not in sword neither in spear; for the battle is his, and he shall betake you into our hands.
1SA 17:48 Therefore when the Philistine had risen, and came, and nighed against David, David hasted, and ran to battle against the Philistine.
1SA 17:49 And David put his hand in his scrip, and he took out a stone, and he casted it with his sling, and led [[it]] about, and smote the Philistine in the forehead; and the stone was fastened in his forehead, and he felled down into his face on the earth.
1SA 17:50 And David had the mastery against the Philistine in a sling and a stone, and he killed the Philistine smitten. And when David had no sword in his hand,
1SA 17:51 he ran, and stood on the Philistine, and took his sword; and David drew out the sword of his sheath, and killed him, and cut off his head. And the Philistines saw, that the strongest of them was dead, and they fled.
1SA 17:52 And the sons of Israel and of Judah rose up together, and cried [[out]], and pursued the Philistines, till the time they came into the valley, and unto the gates of Ekron. And the wounded men of the Philistines fell down in the way of Shaaraim, and unto Gath, and unto Ekron.
1SA 17:53 And the sons of Israel turned again, after that they had pursued the Philistines, and they assailed their tents.
1SA 17:54 Forsooth David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it into Jerusalem; soothly he putted his arms or armours in the tabernacle of the Lord.
1SA 17:55 Forsooth in that time in which Saul saw David going out against the Philistine, he said to Abner, [[the]] prince of his chivalry, Abner, of what generation is this young man? And Abner said, King, thy soul liveth, I know not.
1SA 17:56 And the king said, Ask thou, whose son this boy is.
1SA 17:57 And when David had come again, when the Philistine was slain, Abner took David, and brought him in, having in the hand the head of the Philistine, before Saul.
1SA 17:58 And Saul said to him, Of what generation art thou, young man? And David said, I am the son of thy servant, Jesse of Bethlehem.
1SA 18:1 And it was done, when David had ended to speak to Saul, the soul of Jonathan was glued together to the soul of David, that is, joined together by the glue of charity, that may not be broken, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul.
1SA 18:2 And Saul took David in that day, and granted not to him, that he should turn again into the house of his father.
1SA 18:3 And Jonathan and David made a bond of peace; for Jonathan loved David as his own soul;
1SA 18:4 for why Jonathan unclothed him-self from the coat that he was clothed in, and he gave it to David, and his other clothes, unto his sword and his bow, and unto his girdle.
1SA 18:5 And David went forth to all things, to whatever things Saul sent him, and he governed himself prudently; and Saul setted him over the men of battle, and he was accepted in the eyes of all the people, and mostly in the sight of the servants of Saul.
1SA 18:6 Forsooth when David turned again, when the Philistine was slain, and bare the head of the Philistine into Jerusalem, women went out of all the cities of Israel, and sang, and led dances, against the coming of king Saul, in tympans of gladness, and in trumps.
1SA 18:7 And the women sang, playing, and saying, Saul hath slain a thousand, and David ten thousand.
1SA 18:8 And Saul was wroth greatly, and this word displeased before him; and he said, They have given ten thousand to David, and but one thousand to me; what leaveth to him, no but the realm alone?
1SA 18:9 Therefore Saul beheld David not with rightful eye, from that day and afterward.
1SA 18:10 Soothly after the tother day, a wicked spirit of God assailed Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of his house. And David harped with his hand, as by all days before; and Saul held a spear,
1SA 18:11 and cast it, and guessed that he might preen David with the wall, that is, pierce right through him with the spear, so that it should pass into the wall; and David bowed [[aside]] from his face the second time.
1SA 18:12 And Saul dreaded David, for the Lord was with David, and had gone away from him.
1SA 18:13 Then Saul removed David from himself, and made him chieftain upon a thousand men; and David went out and he came in before the people.
1SA 18:14 And David did wisely in all his ways, and the Lord was with him;
1SA 18:15 and so Saul saw that David was full prudent or full wise, and he began to beware of David.
1SA 18:16 And all Israel and Judah loved David; for he went in and out before them.
1SA 18:17 And Saul said to David, Lo! mine elder daughter Merab, I shall give her for a wife to thee; only be thou a strong man, and fight thou the Lord’s battles. Forsooth Saul areckoned, and said, Mine hand be not in him, but the hand of Philistines be on him.
1SA 18:18 And David said to Saul, Who am I, either what is my life, either the family of my father in Israel, that I be made the son-in-law of the king?
1SA 18:19 And when the time came that Merab, the daughter of Saul, should have been given wife to David, she was given wife to Adriel the Meholathite.
1SA 18:20 Forsooth David loved Michal, the [[tother]] daughter of Saul; and it was told to Saul, and it pleased him.
1SA 18:21 And Saul said, I shall give her to him, that it be to him into cause of stumbling, and the hand of Philistines be upon him. Therefore Saul said to David, In wedding one of my two daughters thou shalt be my son-in-law today.
1SA 18:22 And Saul commanded to his servants, Speak ye privily to David, as if it were me unwitting, and say ye to him, Lo! thou pleasest the king, and all his servants love thee; now there-fore be thou [[the]] husband of the king’s daughter.
1SA 18:23 And the servants of Saul spake all these words in the ears of David. And David said, Whether it seem little to you for me to be the king’s son-in-law? Forsooth I am a poor man, and a feeble.
1SA 18:24 And the servants told to Saul, and said, David spake such words.
1SA 18:25 Soothly Saul said, Thus speak ye to David, The king hath no need to gifts for spousals, no but only to an hundred prepuces, that is, men’s rods uncircumcised, of the Philistines, that vengeance be made of the king’s enemies. Certainly Saul thought to betake David into the hands of Philistines.
1SA 18:26 And when the servants of Saul had told to David the words, which Saul had said, the word pleased in the eyes of David, that he should be made the king’s son-in-law. And after a few days,
1SA 18:27 David rose up, and went into Ekron, with the men that were with him, and he killed of Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their prepuces, and he numbered those [[or them]] to the king, that he should be the king’s son-in-law. And so Saul gave Michal, his daughter, wife to him.
1SA 18:28 And Saul saw, and understood, that the Lord was with David. Certainly Michal, Saul’s daughter, loved David,
1SA 18:29 and Saul began more to dread David; and Saul was made enemy to David in all days.
1SA 18:30 And the princes of Philistines went out to fight; but from the beginning of their going out, David bare himself more wisely than all the men of Saul; and the name of David was made full solemn.
1SA 19:1 Soothly Saul spake to Jonathan, his son, and to all his servants, that they should slay David;
1SA 19:2 certainly Jonathan, the son of Saul, loved David greatly. And Jonathan showed to David, and said, Saul, my father, seeketh to slay thee; wherefore, I beseech, keep thyself tomorrow early; and thou shalt dwell privily, and thou shalt be hid.
1SA 19:3 And I shall go out, and stand be-side my father in the field, wherever he shall be; and I shall speak of thee to my father, and whatever thing I shall see or whatever thing I shall understand of him, I shall tell thee.
1SA 19:4 Then Jonathan spake good things of David to Saul, his father, and said to him, King, do thou not sin against thy servant David, for he hath not sinned to thee, and his works be full good to thee;
1SA 19:5 and he putted his life in his hand, and he killed the Philistine. And the Lord made great help to all Israel; thou sawest, and were glad; why therefore sinnest thou in guiltless blood, and wilt slay David, that is without guilt?
1SA 19:6 And when Saul had heard this, he was pleased with the speaking of Jonathan, and he swore, The Lord liveth, for David shall not be slain.
1SA 19:7 And so Jonathan called David, and showed to him all these words. And Jonathan brought in David to Saul, and he was before him as [[he was]] yesterday and the third day ago.
1SA 19:8 Forsooth battle was moved again; and David went out, and fought against the Philistines, and he smote them with a great wound or great fierceness, and they fled from his face.
1SA 19:9 And the evil spirit of the Lord was made upon Saul; and he sat in his house, and held a spear; certainly David harped with his hand.
1SA 19:10 And Saul enforced or endeavour-ed to preen, that is pierce, with the spear right through David into the wall; and David bowed [[aside]] from the face of Saul; and the spear without hurt of David was fixed into the wall; and David fled, and so he was saved in that night.
1SA 19:11 Therefore Saul sent his knights in the night into the house of David, that they should keep him, and that he should be slain in the morrowtide. And when Michal, the wife of David, had told this to David, and said, If thou savest not thee in this night, thou shalt die tomorrow;
1SA 19:12 and she let him down by a window. And David went, and fled thence, and he was saved.
1SA 19:13 And Michal took an image, and laid it on the bed of David, and she put a rough goatskin at the head thereof, and covered it with clothes.
1SA 19:14 Forsooth Saul sent sergeants, that should ravish [[or take]] David, and it was answered, that he was sick.
1SA 19:15 And again Saul sent messengers, that they should see David, and he said, Bring ye him to me in the bed, that he be slain.
1SA 19:16 And when the messengers had come, a simulacrum was found on the bed, and skins of goat at the head thereof.
1SA 19:17 And Saul said to Michal, Why scornedest thou me so, and deliver-edest mine enemy, that he fled? And Michal answered to Saul, For he spake to me, and said, Deliver thou me, else I shall slay thee.
1SA 19:18 Forsooth David fled, and was saved; and he came to Samuel into Ramah, and told to him all things which Saul had done to him; and he and Samuel went, and dwelled in Naioth.
1SA 19:19 And it was told to Saul of men, saying to him, Lo! David is in Naioth in Ramah.
1SA 19:20 Therefore Saul sent menslayers, that they should ravish [[or take]]from thence David; and when they had seen the company of prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing over them, the Spirit of the Lord was made in them, and they also began to prophesy.
1SA 19:21 And when this was told to Saul, he sent also other messengers; soothly and they prophesied. And again Saul sent the third messengers, and they prophesied.
1SA 19:22 And Saul was wroth with ireful-ness; and he also went into Ramah, and he came unto the great cistern which is in Sechu, and he asked, and said, In what place be Samuel and David? And it was said to him, Lo! they be in Naioth in Ramah.
1SA 19:23 And he went thither into Naioth in Ramah; and the Spirit of the Lord was made also on him; and he went, and entered, and prophesied, till the while he came into Naioth in Ramah.
1SA 19:24 And Saul also unclothed him of his clothes, and he prophesied with other men before Samuel, and he prophesied naked all that day and night. Wherefore a common saying went out, Whether and Saul be among [[the]] prophets?
1SA 20:1 Forsooth David fled from Naioth, which is in Ramah, and came and spake before Jonathan, What have I done? what is my wickedness, and what is my sin against thy father, for he seeketh my life?
1SA 20:2 And Jonathan said to him, Far be it from thee, thou shalt not die, for my father shall not do anything great either little, no but he show first to me; therefore, my father kept privy from me this word only, forsooth it shall not be. And again he swore to David.
1SA 20:3 And David said, Truly thy father knoweth, that I have found grace in thine eyes, and he shall say, Jonathan know not this, lest peradventure he be sorry; certainly the Lord liveth, and thy soul liveth, for, that I say so, I and death be parted only by one degree.
1SA 20:4 And Jonathan said to David, Whatever thing thy soul shall say to me, I shall do it to thee.
1SA 20:5 And David said to Jonathan, Lo! calends be tomorrow, that is the feast of the new moon, and by custom I am wont to sit by the king to eat; therefore suffer thou me, that I be hid in the field till to [[the]] eventide of the third day.
1SA 20:6 And if thy father beholdeth, and asketh after me, thou shalt answer to him, David prayed me, that he might go at once into Bethlehem, his city, for solemn sacrifices be now there to all [[the]] men of his lineage.
1SA 20:7 If he saith, Well, peace shall be to thy servant; forsooth if he is wroth, know thou, that his malice is filled.
1SA 20:8 Therefore do thou mercy into thy servant, for thou hast made me thy servant to make with thee bond of peace of the Lord; but if any wicked-ness is in me, slay thou me, and bring thou not in me to thy father.
1SA 20:9 And Jonathan said, Far be this from me, for it may not be done, that I tell not to thee, if I know certainly, that the malice of my father is filled against thee.
1SA 20:10 And David answered to Jonathan, Who shall tell me, if in case thy father answereth hard [[to thee]] anything of me?
1SA 20:11 And Jonathan said to David, Come thou, and go we forth into the field. And when they both had gone into the field,
1SA 20:12 Jonathan said to David, Thou Lord God of Israel, if I inquire the sentence of my father tomorrow, either in the next day after, and any good thing be said of thee, David, and I send not at once to thee, and make it known to thee,
1SA 20:13 God do these things to Jonathan, and add these things. And if the malice of my father continue against thee, I shall show it to thine ear, and I shall deliver thee, that thou go in peace; and the Lord be with thee, as he was with my father.
1SA 20:14 And if I live, do thou the mercies of the Lord to me; forsooth if I am dead,
1SA 20:15 take thou not away thy mercy from mine house unto without end; and if I do it not, when the Lord shall draw out by the root the enemies of David, each man from the land, take he away Jonathan from his house, and seek the Lord of the hand of the enemies of David.
1SA 20:16 Therefore Jonathan made [[a]] bond of peace with the house of David, and the Lord sought it of the hand of [[the]] enemies of David.
1SA 20:17 And Jonathan added to swear steadfastly to David, for he loved him; for he loved so David, as his own soul.
1SA 20:18 And Jonathan said to David, Tomorrow is the first day of the month, that is solemn, and thou shalt be sought after;
1SA 20:19 and thy sitting shall be asked of till after the morrow. Therefore thou shalt go down hastily, and thou shalt come into a place, where thou shalt be hid in the day, when it is leaveful to work; and thou shalt sit beside the stone, that is called Ezel.
1SA 20:20 And I shall shoot three arrows beside that stone, and I shall cast as exercising, either playing me at a sign.
1SA 20:21 I shall send my child, and I shall say to him, Go thou, and bring to me the arrows. If I say to the child, Lo! the arrows be on this side of thee, take thou those [[or them]]; then come thou to me, for peace is to thee, and nothing is of evil, the Lord liveth.
1SA 20:22 But if I speak thus to the child, Lo! the arrows be beyond thee; go thou in peace, for the Lord hath delivered thee.
1SA 20:23 Certainly of the word that thou and I have spoken, that is, of the bond of peace betwixt us and our heirs, the Lord be witness betwixt me and thee till into without end.
1SA 20:24 Therefore David was hid in the field; and the calends or solemn feast came, and the king sat to eat bread.
1SA 20:25 And when the king had set on his chair by custom, which chair was beside the wall, Jonathan rose, and sat after Abner, and Abner sat at the side of Saul, and the place of David appeared void.
1SA 20:26 And Saul spake not anything in that day; for he thought, that in hap it befelled to him, that he was not clean, neither purified.
1SA 20:27 And when the second day after the calends had shined, again the place of David appeared void. And Saul said to Jonathan his son, Why cometh not the son of Jesse, neither yesterday, neither today, to eat?
1SA 20:28 And Jonathan answered to Saul, He prayed me meekly that he should go into Bethlehem;
1SA 20:29 and he said, Suffer thou me, for solemn sacrifice is in my city; one of my brethren [[hath]] called me; now therefore, if I [[have]] found grace in thine eyes, I shall go soon, and I shall see my brethren; for this cause he cometh not to the table of the king.
1SA 20:30 And Saul was wroth against Jonathan, and said to him, Thou son of the woman willfully ravishing a man, whether I know not, that thou lovest the son of Jesse into thy [[own]] confusion or shame, and into the confusion of thy shameful mother?
1SA 20:31 For in all the days in which the son of Jesse liveth on [[the]] earth, thou shalt not be stablished, neither thy realm; therefore right now or anon send thou, and bring him to me, for he is the son of death.
1SA 20:32 And Jonathan answered to Saul his father, and said, Why shall he die? what hath he done?
1SA 20:33 And Saul took a spear, that he should smite him, and Jonathan under-stood, that it was determined of his father, that David should be slain.
1SA 20:34 Then Jonathan rose from the table in full fierce wrath, and he ate not bread in the second day of calends; for he was sorry for David, for his father had shamed him.
1SA 20:35 And when the morrowtide had shined, Jonathan came into the field, and a little child with him, by the covenant made of David.
1SA 20:36 And Jonathan said to his child, Go thou, and bring to me the arrows that I shoot. And when the child had run forth, he shot another arrow beyond the child.
1SA 20:37 Therefore when the child came to the place of the arrow that Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried behind the back of the child, and said, Lo! the arrow is not there, certainly it is beyond thee.
1SA 20:38 And Jonathan cried again behind the back of the child, Haste thou swiftly, stand thou not. Soothly the child gathered up the arrows of Jonathan, and brought them to his lord,
1SA 20:39 and utterly the child knew not what was done; for only Jonathan and David knew the thing.
1SA 20:40 Then Jonathan gave his bow and arrows to the child, and said to him, Go thou, bear these into the city.
1SA 20:41 And when the child had gone, David rose from the place that went to the south; and he felled low upon the earth, and worshipped or honour-ed the third time, and they kissed themselves together, and wept together; but David wept more.
1SA 20:42 Then Jonathan said to David, Go thou in peace; whatever things we both have sworn in the name of the Lord, and said, The Lord be betwixt me and thee, and betwixt my seed and thy seed, till into without end, be steadfast. And David rose up, and went forth, but and Jonathan went into the city.
1SA 21:1 Forsooth David came into Nob to Ahimelech, the priest; and Ahimelech wondered, for David had come; and he said to David, Why art thou alone, and no man is with thee?
1SA 21:2 And David said to Ahimelech the priest, The king hath commanded to me a word, and said, No man know this thing, for which thou art sent from me, and what manner behests I have given to thee; for I said also to my children, that they should go into that and that place;
1SA 21:3 now therefore if thou hast anything at hand, either five loaves, give thou to me, either whatever thing thou findest.
1SA 21:4 And the priest answered to David, and said to him, I have not lay, that is, common, loaves at hand, but only holy bread; whether the children be clean, and mostly of women?
1SA 21:5 And David answered to the priest, and said to him, And soothly if it is done of women, we have abstained us from yesterday and the third day ago, when we went out, and the vessels, that is, bodies, of the children were clean; certainly this way is defouled, but and it shall be hallowed today in the vessels.
1SA 21:6 Therefore the priest gave to him hallowed bread, for none other bread was there, but only loaves of setting forth, that were taken away from the face of the Lord, that hot loaves shall be set forth.
1SA 21:7 And a man of the servants of Saul was there that day, within in the tabernacle of the Lord; and his name was Doeg of Idumea, the mightiest man of the herdsmen of Saul.
1SA 21:8 And David said to Ahimelech, If thou hast here at hand spear, either sword, give it to me; for I took not with me my sword, neither mine arms; for why the king’s word constrained me to go in haste.
1SA 21:9 And the priest said, Lo! the sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou killedest in the valley of Terebinth, is wrapped in a cloth next after [[the]] ephod; if thou wilt take this, take it; for there is none other except that. And David said, None other is like this, give thou it to me.
1SA 21:10 And so David rose up, and fled in that day from the face of Saul, and came to Achish, the king of Gath.
1SA 21:11 And the servants of Achish said to him, when they had seen David, Whether this is not David, [[the]] king of the land? Whether they sang not to him by quires [[or with dances]], and said, Saul smote a thousand, and David smote ten thousand?
1SA 21:12 And David took these words in his heart, and he dreaded greatly of the face of Achish, king of Gath.
1SA 21:13 And David changed his mouth before Achish, and felled down betwixt their hands, and he painted on the doors of the gate, and his dribbles, that is, spittles, flowed down into his beard.
1SA 21:14 And Achish said to his servants, See ye the mad man? why brought ye him to me?
1SA 21:15 whether mad men fail to us? why have ye brought in him, that he should be mad, while I am present? Deliver ye him from hence, lest he enter into mine house.
1SA 22:1 Therefore David went from thence, and fled into the den of Adullam; and when his brethren, and all the house of his father had heard this, they came down thither to him.
1SA 22:2 And all men that were set in anguish, and oppressed with other men’s debt, and in bitter soul, came together to him; and he was made the prince of them, and as four hundred men were with him.
1SA 22:3 And David went forth from thence into Mizpeh, that is in Moab; and he said to the king of Moab, I pray, dwell my father and my mother with you, till I know what thing God shall do to me.
1SA 22:4 And he left them there before the face of the king of Moab; and they dwelled at him in all the days, that David was in the forcelet, either strong-hold.
1SA 22:5 And Gad, the prophet, said to David, Do not thou dwell in the forcelet or stronghold; go thou forth, and go into the land of Judah. And David went forth, and came into the forest of Hareth.
1SA 22:6 And Saul heard, that David appeared, and the men that were with him. And when Saul dwelled in Gibeah, and was in a wood that is in Ramah, and he held a spear in his hand, and all his servants stood about him,
1SA 22:7 he said to his servants that stood nigh [[to]] him, Ye sons of Benjamin, hear me now; whether the son of Jesse shall give to all you fields and vineries [[or vines]], and he shall make all you chieftains upon thousands, and [[leaders]] upon hundreds of men?
1SA 22:8 For all ye have sworn, either conspired, together against me, and none is that telleth to me; mostly since also my son hath joined bond of peace with the son of Jesse; none is of you, that sorroweth for my stead or my while, neither that telleth to me, for my son hath raised my servant against me, setting treason to me, unto this day.
1SA 22:9 Soothly Doeg of Idumea answered, that stood nigh, and was the first among the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse in Nob, at Ahimelech, the priest, the son of Ahitub;
1SA 22:10 and Ahimelech counselled with the Lord for David, and gave him meats, but also he gave to David the sword of Goliath Philistine.
1SA 22:11 Therefore the king sent to call Ahimelech, the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all the house of his father, of [[the]] priests that were in Nob; which all came to the king.
1SA 22:12 And Saul said to Ahimelech, Hear me, thou son of Ahitub. Which answered, Lord, I am ready.
1SA 22:13 And Saul said to him, Why hast thou conspired against me, thou, and the son of Jesse, and [[thou]] hast given loaves and a sword to him, and hast counselled with the Lord for him, that he should rise against me, and he dwelleth a traitor unto this day?
1SA 22:14 And Ahimelech answered to the king, and said, Who among all thy servants is so faithful as David, and he is thy son-in-law, and going at thy behest, and glorious in all thine house?
1SA 22:15 Whether I began today to counsel with the Lord for him? Far be this from me; suppose not the king such thing against his servant, in all the house of my father; for thy servant knew not anything, either little, either great, of this cause.
1SA 22:16 And the king said, Ahimelech, thou shalt die by death, thou, and all the house of thy father.
1SA 22:17 And the king said to men able to be sent out, that stood about him, Turn ye, and slay the priests of the Lord, for the hand of them is with David; and they knew that he fled, and they showed not to me. Soothly the servants of the king would not hold forth their hand into the priests of the Lord.
1SA 22:18 And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, and hurtle into the priests of the Lord. And Doeg of Idumea turned, and hurtled into the priests, and strangled in that day fourscore and five men, clothed with ephods of linen cloth [[or surplices]].
1SA 22:19 Forsooth he smote Nob, the city of the priests, by the sharpness of sword, men and women, little children and those sucking, and ox, and ass, and sheep, by the sharpness of sword.
1SA 22:20 But one son of Ahimelech, the son of Ahitub, escaped, of which son the name was Abiathar; and he fled to David,
1SA 22:21 and told him that Saul had slain the priests of the Lord.
1SA 22:22 And David said to Abiathar, Soothly I knew in that day, that when Doeg of Idumea was there, he would tell without doubt to Saul; I am guilty of all the lives that be slain of thy father’s house.
1SA 22:23 Dwell thou with me, dread thou not; if any man seeketh thy life, he shall seek also my life, and thou shalt be kept with me.
1SA 23:1 And they told to David, and said, Lo! The Philistines fight against Keilah, and ravish the cornfloors.
1SA 23:2 Therefore David counselled with the Lord, and said, Whether I shall go, and smite these Philistines? And the Lord said to David, Go forth, and thou shalt smite the Philistines, and thou shalt save Keilah.
1SA 23:3 And men, that were with David, said to him, Lo! we be here in Judah, and have dread; how much more if we shall go into Keilah against the companies of Philistines.
1SA 23:4 Therefore again David counselled with the Lord; the which answered, and said to David, Rise thou up, and go into Keilah; for I shall betake [[the]] Philistines into thine hand.
1SA 23:5 Therefore David went, and his men, into Keilah, and fought against the Philistines; and he drove away their work beasts, and smote them with [[a]] great wound; and David saved the dwellers of Keilah.
1SA 23:6 And in that time, wherein Abiathar, [[the]] son of Ahimelech, fled to David into Keilah, he came down, and had with him ephod, that is, the cloth of the highest priest.
1SA 23:7 And it was told to Saul, that David had come into Keilah; and Saul said, The Lord hath taken him into mine hands, and he is enclosed, and entered into a city, in which be gates and locks.
1SA 23:8 And Saul commanded to all the people, that it should go down to battle into Keilah, and besiege David and his men.
1SA 23:9 And when David perceived, that Saul made ready evil privily to him, he said to Abiathar, the priest, Bring hither [[the]] ephod.
1SA 23:10 And David said, Lord God of Israel, thy servant hath heard say, that Saul disposeth to come to Keilah, that he destroy the city for me;
1SA 23:11 if the men of Keilah shall betake me into his hands, and if Saul shall come down, as thy servant hath heard, thou Lord God of Israel, show to thy servant? And the Lord said, He shall come down.
1SA 23:12 And David said again, Whether the men of Keilah shall betake me, and the men that be with me, into the hands of Saul? And the Lord said, They shall betake thee to Saul, if thou abidest him there.
1SA 23:13 Therefore David rose, and his men, as six hundred; and they went out of Keilah, and wandered uncertain hither and thither. And it was told to Saul, that David had fled from Keilah, and was saved; wherefore Saul dis-sembled to go out.
1SA 23:14 But David dwelled in the desert, in full strong places, and he dwelled in the hill of wilderness of Ziph, in a dark hill; nevertheless Saul sought him in all days, and the Lord betook not him into the hands of Saul.
1SA 23:15 And David saw, that Saul went out, that he would seek his life. And David was in the desert of Ziph, in a wood.
1SA 23:16 And Jonathan, the son of Saul, rose up, and went to David into the wood, and comforted his hands in God.
1SA 23:17 And he said to David, Dread thou not; for the hand of Saul my father shall not find thee, and thou shalt reign on Israel, and I shall be the second to thee; but also Saul my father knoweth this.
1SA 23:18 Therefore ever either smote bond of peace before the Lord. And David dwelled in the wood; and Jonathan turned again into his house.
1SA 23:19 Certainly men of Ziph went up to Saul in Gibeah, and said, Lo! whether not David is hid with us in the full secure places in the thick woods, in the hill of Hachilah, that is at the right side of desert?
1SA 23:20 Now therefore come thou down, as thy soul desired, that thou shouldest come down; forsooth it shall be our doing, that we betake him into the hands of the king.
1SA 23:21 And Saul said, Blessed be ye of the Lord, for ye [[have]] sorrowed for my stead or for my while.
1SA 23:22 Therefore, I pray you, go ye, and make ready more diligently, and do ye more curiously, either attentively, and behold ye swiftly, where his foot is, either who saw him there, where ye said; for he thinketh on me, that fellily or slyly I ambush him.
1SA 23:23 Behold ye, and see all his hiding places, in which he is hid, and then turn ye again to me at a certain thing, that I go with you; that if he encloseth himself yea in [[the]] earth, I shall seek him with all the thousands of Judah.
1SA 23:24 And they rose up, and went into Ziph before Saul. And David and his men were in the desert of Maon, in the field places, at the right half of Jeshimon.
1SA 23:25 Therefore Saul went and his fellows to seek David, and it was told to David; and anon he went down to the stone, and lived in the desert of Maon; and when Saul had heard this, he pursued David in the desert of Maon.
1SA 23:26 And Saul went and his men at the side of the hill on [[the]] one part; forsooth David and his men were in the side of the hill on the tother part; soothly David despaired, that he might not escape from the face of Saul. And so Saul and his men compassed by the manner of a crown round about David and his men, that they should take them.
1SA 23:27 And a messenger came to Saul, and said, Haste thou, and come, for the Philistines have spread themselves on the land.
1SA 23:28 Therefore Saul turned again, and ceased to pursue David; and went against the coming of Philistines. For this thing they called that place The Stone of Parting.
1SA 23:29 Therefore David went up from thence, and dwelled in the most secure places of Engedi.
1SA 24:1 And when Saul turned again, after that he pursued [[the]] Philistines, they told to him, and said, Lo! David is in the desert of Engedi.
1SA 24:2 Therefore Saul took three thousand chosen men of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men, yea upon the most broken rocks, the which be thorough-ways [[or throughways]] to wild goats alone.
1SA 24:3 And he came to the folds of sheep, that offered themselves to the way-goer. And there was a cave, into which Saul entered, that he would purge his womb; forsooth David and his men were hid in the inner part of the den.
1SA 24:4 And the servants of David said to him, Lo! the day of which the Lord spake to thee, I shall betake to thee thine enemy, that thou do to him as it pleaseth in thine eyes. Therefore David rose up, and cutted the hem of the mantle of Saul privily.
1SA 24:5 After these things, David smote his heart, that is, his conscience reproved him, for he had cut away the hem of the mantle of Saul.
1SA 24:6 And David said to his men, The Lord be merciful to me, lest I do this thing to my lord, the anointed of the Lord, or that I send mine hand on him, for he is the christ or the anointed of the Lord.
1SA 24:7 The Lord liveth, for but the Lord smite him, either his day come, that he die, either he go down into battle, and perish, the Lord be merciful to me, that I send not mine hand into the christ of the Lord; and David brake his men by such words, and suffered not them, that they rised against Saul. And Saul rose out of the den, and went in the way begun.
1SA 24:8 And David rose up after him, and he went out of the den, and cried after the back of Saul, and said, My lord, the king! And Saul beheld behind himself; and David bowed him-self low to the earth, and worshipped him.
1SA 24:9 And David said to Saul, Why hearest thou the words of men speak-ing, David seeketh evil against thee?
1SA 24:10 Lo! today thine eyes saw, that the Lord betook thee in mine hand in the den, and I thought that I would slay thee, but mine eye spared thee; for I said, I shall not hold forth mine hand into my lord, for he is the anointed of the Lord.
1SA 24:11 But rather, my father, see thou, and know the hem of thy mantle in mine hand; for when I cutted away the hem off thy mantle, I would not hold forth mine hand against thee; perceive thou, and see, for neither evil neither wickedness is in mine hand, neither I have sinned against thee; but thou ambushest my life, that thou do it away.
1SA 24:12 The Lord deem betwixt me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee; but mine hand be not against thee,
1SA 24:13 as it is said in [[the]] eld [[or old]] proverb, Wickedness shall go out of wicked men; therefore mine hand be not against thee.
1SA 24:14 Whom pursuest thou, king of Israel, whom pursuest thou? Thou pursuest a dead hound, and a quick flea.
1SA 24:15 The Lord be judge, and the Lord deem betwixt me and thee, and see, and deem my cause, and deliver me from thine hand.
1SA 24:16 And when David had filled, or ended, speaking such manner words to Saul, Saul said, Whether this is thy voice, my son David? And Saul raised up his voice, and wept.
1SA 24:17 And he said to David, Thou art more just [[or rightwise]] than I; for thou gavest good things to me; but I have yielded evils [[or evil things]] to thee.
1SA 24:18 And thou hast showed to me today, what goods [[or good things]] thou hast done to me, how the Lord betook me in thine hand, and thou killedest not me.
1SA 24:19 For who, when he findeth his enemy, shall deliver him into good way? But the Lord yield to thee this while, for that, thou hast wrought today in me.
1SA 24:20 And now, for I know, that thou shalt reign most certainly, and shalt have in thine hand the realm of Israel,
1SA 24:21 swear thou to me in the Lord, that thou do not away my seed after me, neither take away my name from the house of my father.
1SA 24:22 And David swore to Saul. There-fore Saul went into his house, and David and his men went up to secure places.
1SA 25:1 Forsooth Samuel was dead; and all Israel was gathered together, and they bewailed him greatly, and buried him in his house in Ramah. And David rose up, and went down into the desert of Paran.
1SA 25:2 And in Maon there was a man, and his possession was in Carmel; and that man was full great, and there were to him three thousand sheep, and a thousand of goats; and it befelled that his flock was shorn in Carmel.
1SA 25:3 And the name of that man was Nabal, and the name of his wife was Abigail; and that woman was most prudent and fair; but her husband was hard and full wicked and malicious; and he was of the kin of Caleb.
1SA 25:4 Therefore when David had heard in desert, that Nabal clipped his flock,
1SA 25:5 he sent ten young men, and said to them, Go ye up into Carmel, and ye shall come to Nabal, and ye shall greet him of [[or in]] my name peaceably;
1SA 25:6 and ye shall say thus, Peace be to my brethren and to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be to all things, whatever thou hast.
1SA 25:7 I have heard that thy shepherds, that were with us in desert, have shorn thy flocks; we were never dis-easeful to them, neither any time anything of the flock failed to them, in all the time in which they were with us in Carmel;
1SA 25:8 ask thy children, and they shall show to thee. Now therefore thy children find grace in thine eyes; for in a good day we come to thee; whatever thing thine hand findeth, give it to thy servants, and to thy son David.
1SA 25:9 And when the children of David had come, they spake to Nabal all these words in the name of David, and held [[their]] peace.
1SA 25:10 Forsooth Nabal answered to the children of David, and said, Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse? Today servants [[have]] increased that flee their lords.
1SA 25:11 Therefore shall I take my loaves, and my waters, and the flesh of beasts, which I have slain to my shearers, and shall I give to men, that I know not of whence they be?
1SA 25:12 Therefore the children of David went again by their way; and they turned again, and came, and told to him all words which Nabal had said.
1SA 25:13 Then David said to his children, Each man be gird with his sword. And all men were girded with their swords, and David also was girded with his sword; and as four hundred men pursued [[or followed]] David, for two hundred were left at the fardels.
1SA 25:14 And one of the children told to Abigail, the wife of Nabal, and said, Lo! David sent messengers from desert, that they should bless our lord, and he turned them away;
1SA 25:15 these men were good enough, and not dis-easeful to us, and nothing of ours perished in all the time in which we were with them in desert;
1SA 25:16 they were to us for a wall, both in night and day, in all the days in which we pastured flocks with them.
1SA 25:17 Wherefore behold thou, and think, what thou shalt do; for malice is full-filled against thine husband, and against thine house; and he is the son of Belial, so that no man may speak sense to him.
1SA 25:18 Therefore Abigail hasted, and took two hundred loaves, and two vessels of wine, and five wethers sodden, and seven bushels and an half of flour, and an hundred bundles of dried grapes, or raisins, and two hundred pieces of dried figs; and she put all this upon asses,
1SA 25:19 and said to her children, Go ye before me; lo! I shall pursue [[or follow]] you behind your back. And she showed not this to her husband Nabal.
1SA 25:20 Therefore when she had gone upon an ass, and came down to the foot of the hill, David and his men came down into her coming; the which she met.
1SA 25:21 And David had just said, Verily in vain I have kept all these things that were of this Nabal in the desert, and nothing perished of all things that pertained to him, and he hath yielded to me evil for good.
1SA 25:22 The Lord do these things, and add he these things to the enemies of David, if I shall leave undestroyed of all things that pertain to him till tomorrow, yea, even a pisser to a wall.
1SA 25:23 And when Abigail saw David, she hasted, and went down off the ass; and she fell down before David on her face, and worshipped him on the earth.
1SA 25:24 And she felled down to his feet, and said, My lord the king, this wicked-ness be in me; I beseech thee, speak thine handmaid in thine ears, and hear thou the words of thy servantess;
1SA 25:25 I pray, my lord the king, set not his heart on this wicked man Nabal, for by his name he is a fool, and folly is with him; but, my lord, I thine handmaid saw not thy children, which thou sentest.
1SA 25:26 Now therefore, my lord, the Lord liveth, and thy soul liveth, the which Lord hath forbidden thee, that thou shouldest come into blood, and the Lord saved thy life to thee; and now thine enemies, and they that seek evil to thee my lord, be they made as Nabal.
1SA 25:27 Wherefore receive thou this bless-ing, or gift, which thine handmaid [[hath]] brought to thee, my lord, and give it to the children that pursue [[or follow]] thee, my lord.
1SA 25:28 Do thou away the wickedness of thy servantess; for the Lord making shall make a faithful house to thee, my lord, for thou, my lord, fightest the battles of the Lord; therefore malice be not found in thee in all the days of thy life.
1SA 25:29 For if a man riseth any time, and pursueth thee, and seeketh thy life, the life of my lord shall be kept as in a bundle of living trees, at thy Lord God; but the soul of thine enemies shall be hurled round about as in [[the]] fierceness, and [[the]] circle of a sling.
1SA 25:30 Therefore when the Lord hath done to thee, my lord, all these good things, which he hath spoken of thee, and hath ordained thee duke upon Israel,
1SA 25:31 this shall not be into sighing, that is, into mourning of soul, and into remorse of conscience, and into doubt of heart to thee, my lord, that thou hast shed out guiltless blood, either that thou hast avenged thyself. And when the Lord hath done well to thee, my lord, thou shalt have mind on thine handmaid, and thou shalt do well to her.
1SA 25:32 And David said to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that sent thee today into my coming,
1SA 25:33 and blessed be thy speech; and blessed be thou, that hast forbade me, lest I went today to shed blood, and had avenged me with mine hand;
1SA 25:34 else the Lord God of Israel liveth, which forbade me, lest I did evil to thee, if thou haddest not soon come into meeting to me, a pisser to the wall should not have been left to Nabal till to the morrow light.
1SA 25:35 Therefore David received of her hand all things which she had brought to him; and he said to her, Go thou in peace into thine house; lo! I have heard thy voice, and I honoured thy face.
1SA 25:36 Forsooth Abigail came to Nabal; and lo! a feast was to him in his house, as the feast of a king; and the heart of Nabal was merry, certainly he was full drunken; and she showed not to him a word, little or great, till the morrow.
1SA 25:37 But in the morrowtide, when Nabal had voided the wine, his wife showed to him all these words; and his heart was almost dead within, and he was made as a stone.
1SA 25:38 And when ten days had passed, the Lord smote Nabal, and he was dead.
1SA 25:39 The which thing when David had heard, Nabal to be dead, he said, Blessed be the Lord God, that hath avenged the cause of my shame of the hand of Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil, and the Lord hath yielded the malice of Nabal into the head of him. Therefore David sent, and spake to Abigail, that he would take her as a wife to him.
1SA 25:40 And the children of David came to Abigail into Carmel, and spake to her, and said, David sent us to thee, that he take thee into wife to him.
1SA 25:41 And she rose up, and worshipped low to the earth, and said, Lo! thy servantess be into an handmaid, that she wash the feet of the servants of my lord.
1SA 25:42 And Abigail hasted, and rose, and ascended or went upon an ass; and five damsels, pursuers [[or followers]] of her feet, went with her, and she followed the messengers of David, and was made [[a]] wife to him.
1SA 25:43 But also David took Ahinoam of Jezreel, and ever either was wife to him;
1SA 25:44 and Saul gave Michal his daughter, [[the]] wife of David, to Phalti, the son of Laish, that was of Gallim.
1SA 26:1 And Ziphites came to Saul into Gibeah, and said, Lo! David is hid in the hill of Hachilah, which is even against the wilderness.
1SA 26:2 And Saul rose up, and went down into the desert of Ziph, and with him three thousand of men of the chosen of Israel, that he should seek David in the desert of Ziph.
1SA 26:3 And Saul setted his tents in the hill of Hachilah, that was even against the wilderness, in the way. And David dwelled in the desert. Forsooth David saw that Saul had come after him into desert;
1SA 26:4 and David sent spyers [[or spies]], and learned most certainly, that Saul had come thither.
1SA 26:5 And David rose up privily, and came to the place where Saul was. And when David had seen the place, wherein Saul slept, and Abner, the son of Ner, the prince of his chivalry; and Saul sleeping in the tent, and the tother common people by his compass;
1SA 26:6 David said to Ahimelech, the Hittite, and to Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, the brother of Joab, saying, Who shall go down with me to Saul into his tents? And Abishai said, I shall go down with thee.
1SA 26:7 Therefore David and Abishai came to the people in the night, and they found Saul lying and sleeping in the tent, and a spear set fast in the earth at his head; forsooth they found Abner and the people sleeping in his compass.
1SA 26:8 And Abishai said to David, God hath enclosed today thine enemy into thine hands; now therefore I shall pierce him with the spear once through, and into the earth, and no need shall be the second time.
1SA 26:9 And David said to Abishai, Slay thou not him, for who shall hold forth his hand into the christ or the anointed of the Lord, and shall be innocent?
1SA 26:10 And David said, The Lord liveth, for no but the Lord smite him, either his day come that he die, either he go down into battle, and perish;
1SA 26:11 the Lord be merciful to me, that I hold not forth mine hand into the christ of the Lord; now therefore take thou the spear, that is at his head, and the cup of water, and go we away.
1SA 26:12 Then David took the spear, and the cup of water, that was at the head of Saul, and they went forth, and no man was that saw, and understood, and waked, but all men slept; for the sleep of the Lord had fallen [[up]] on them.
1SA 26:13 And when David had passed [[over]] even against, and had stood on the top of the hill afar, and a great space was betwixt them,
1SA 26:14 David cried to the people, and to Abner, the son of Ner, and said, Abner, whether thou wilt not answer? And Abner answered, and said, Who art thou, that criest, and dis-easest the king?
1SA 26:15 And David said to Abner, Whether thou art not a man, and what other man is like thee in Israel? why there-fore hast thou not kept thy lord the king? For one man of the company entered, that he should slay thy lord the king;
1SA 26:16 this that thou hast done, is not good; the Lord liveth, for ye be sons of death, that kept not your lord, the christ of the Lord. Now therefore see thou, where is the spear of the king, and where is the cup of water, that was at his head.
1SA 26:17 Forsooth Saul knew the voice of David, and said, Whether this voice is thine, my son David? And David said, My lord the king, it is my voice.
1SA 26:18 And David said, For what cause pursueth my lord his servant? What have I done, either what evil is in mine hand?
1SA 26:19 Now therefore, my lord the king, I pray, hear the words of thy servant; if the Lord stirreth thee against me, the sacrifice be smelled; forsooth if [[the]] sons of men stir thee, they be cursed in the sight of the Lord, which have cast me out today, that I dwell not in the heritage of the Lord, and say, Go thou, serve thou alien gods.
1SA 26:20 And now my blood be not shed out in the earth before the Lord; for the king of Israel hath gone out, that he seek a quick flea, as a partridge is pursued in hills.
1SA 26:21 And Saul said, I have sinned; turn thou again, my son David, for I shall no more do evil to thee, for my life was precious today in thine eyes; for it seemeth, that I have done follily, and I have unknown full many things.
1SA 26:22 And David answered and said, Lo! the spear of the king, one of the children of the king pass over hither, and take it;
1SA 26:23 forsooth the Lord shall yield to each man after his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] and his faith; for the Lord betook thee today into mine hand, and I would not hold forth mine hand into the christ or the anointed of the Lord;
1SA 26:24 and as thy life is magnified today in mine eyes, so my life be magnified in the eyes of the Lord, and deliver he me from all anguish.
1SA 26:25 Therefore Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David; and soothly thou doing shalt do, and thou mighty shalt be mighty. Then David went forth into his way, and Saul turned again into his place.
1SA 27:1 And David said in his heart, Sometime I shall fall in one day in the hand of Saul; whether it is not better, that I flee, and be saved in the land of Philistines, that Saul despair, and cease to seek me in all the ends of Israel; therefore flee we his hands.
1SA 27:2 And David rose up, and went forth, he and six hundred men with him, to Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.
1SA 27:3 And David dwelled with Achish in Gath, he, and his men, and his house; that is, David, and his two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel, and Abigail, the wife of Nabal of Carmel.
1SA 27:4 And it was told to Saul, that David fled into Gath; and he added no more that he should seek David [[or he added no more for to seek him]].
1SA 27:5 Forsooth David said to Achish, If I have found grace in thine eyes, a place be given to me in one of the cities of this country, that I dwell there; for why dwelleth thy servant in the city of the king with thee?
1SA 27:6 Therefore Achish gave him Ziklag in that day, for the which cause Ziklag was made into possession of the kings of Judah unto this day.
1SA 27:7 And the number of days, in which David dwelled in the country of Philistines, was days, that is a year, and four months.
1SA 27:8 And David went up, and his men, and they took preys of Geshurites, and of Gezrites, and of men of Amalek; for these towns were inhabited by eld [[or old]] time in the land, to men going to Shur, unto the land of Egypt.
1SA 27:9 And David smote all the land of them, and he left not man nor woman living; and he took sheep, and oxen, and asses, and camels, and clothes, and turned again, and came to Achish.
1SA 27:10 And Achish said to him, Into whom hurled ye today?/Against whom have ye hurled today? And David answered, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of Jerahmeel, and against the south of Kenites.
1SA 27:11 David left not quick man and woman, neither brought into Gath, and said, Lest peradventure they speak against us. David did these things, and this was his doom, in all [[the]] days in which he dwelled in the country of Philistines.
1SA 27:12 Therefore Achish believed to David, and said, Certainly he hath wrought many evils against his people Israel, therefore he shall be a servant to me for evermore.
1SA 28:1 Forsooth it was done in those days, the Philistines gathered together their companies, that they should be made ready against Israel to battle. And Achish said to David, Thou witting know now, for thou shalt go out with me in tents, thou and thy men.
1SA 28:2 And David said to Achish, Now thou shalt know what things thy servant shall do. And Achish said to David, And I shall set thee keeper of mine head in all days.
1SA 28:3 Forsooth Samuel was dead, and all Israel bewailed him, and they buried him in Ramah, his city. And Saul did away from the land witches and false diviners.
1SA 28:4 And Philistines were gathered, and came, and setted tents in Shunem; soothly and Saul gathered all Israel, and came into Gilboa.
1SA 28:5 And Saul saw the castles [[or tents]] of Philistines, and he dreaded, and his heart dreaded greatly.
1SA 28:6 And he counselled with the Lord; and the Lord answered not to him, neither by priests, nor by dreams, nor by prophets.
1SA 28:7 And Saul said to his servants, Seek ye to me a woman having a fiend speaking in the womb; and I shall go to her, and I shall inquire by her. And his servants said to him, A woman having a fiend speaking in the womb is in Endor.
1SA 28:8 Therefore Saul changed his clothing, and he was clothed with other clothes; and he went, and two men with him; and they came to the woman in the night. And he said, Divine thou to me in a fiend speaking in the womb, and raise thou up to me whom I shall say to thee.
1SA 28:9 And the woman said to him, Lo! thou knowest how great things Saul hath done, and how he hath done away from the land witches, and false diviners; why therefore settest thou treason to my life, that I be slain?
1SA 28:10 And Saul swore to her in the Lord, and said, The Lord liveth; for nothing of evil shall come to thee for this thing.
1SA 28:11 And the woman said to him, Whom shall I raise up to thee? And he said, Raise thou Samuel up to me.
1SA 28:12 Soothly when the woman had seen Samuel, she cried with [[a]] great voice, and said to Saul, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou art Saul.
1SA 28:13 And the king said to her, Do not thou dread; what hast thou seen? And the woman said to Saul, I saw gods ascending or going up from [[the]] earth.
1SA 28:14 And Saul said to her, What manner form is of him? [[or What manner is the form of him?]] And she said, An eld [[or old]] man goeth up, and he is clothed with a mantle. And Saul understood that it was Samuel; and Saul bowed himself on his face to the earth, and worshipped.
1SA 28:15 And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou dis-eased me, that I should be raised? And Saul said, I am constrained greatly; for the Philistines fight against me, and God hath gone away from me, and he would not hear me, neither by the hand of prophets, nor by dreams; therefore I called thee, that thou shouldest show to me what I shall do.
1SA 28:16 And Samuel said, What askest thou me, when God hath gone away from thee, and hath passed to thine enemy?
1SA 28:17 For the Lord shall do to thee as he spake in mine hand, and he shall cut away thy realm from thine hand, and he shall give it to David, thy neighbour;
1SA 28:18 for thou obeyedest not the voice of the Lord, neither thou didest the fierce wrath of the Lord in Amalek. Therefore the Lord hath done to thee today that that thou sufferest;
1SA 28:19 and the Lord shall give also Israel with thee in the hand of Philistines. Forsooth tomorrow thou and thy sons shall be with me; but also the Lord shall betake the castles [[or tents]] of Israel in the hand of the Philistines.
1SA 28:20 And anon Saul fell down and was stretched forth upon the earth; for he dreaded the words of Samuel, and strength was not in him, for he had not eaten bread in all that day and all that night.
1SA 28:21 Therefore that woman entered to Saul, and said; for he was troubled greatly; and she said to him, Lo! thine handmaid hath obeyed to thy voice, and I have put my life in mine hand, and I heard thy words, which thou spakest to me.
1SA 28:22 And now therefore thou hear the voice of thine handmaid, and I shall set a morsel of bread before thee, and that thou eating wax strong, and mayest do thy journey.
1SA 28:23 And he forsook it, and said, I shall not eat. But his servants and the woman compelled him; and at the last, when the voice of them was heard, he rose up from the earth, and sat on the bed.
1SA 28:24 Soothly that woman had a fat calf in the house, and she hasted, and killed it; and she took meal, and meddled [[or mingled]] it together, and made therf bread;
1SA 28:25 and she set forth before Saul, and before his servants, and when they had eaten, they rose up, and walked in all the night.
1SA 29:1 Therefore all the companies of the Philistines were gathered in Aphek, but also Israel setted tents above the well that was in Jezreel.
1SA 29:2 And soothly the princes of the Philistines went in companies of an hundred, and in thousands; but David and his men were in the last company with Achish.
1SA 29:3 And the princes of Philistines said to Achish, What will or desire these Hebrews to or for themselves? And Achish said to the princes of Philistines, Whether ye know not David, that was the servant of Saul, king of Israel? and he was with me many days, either years, and I found not in him anything of imagining to evil, from the day in which he fled to me unto this day.
1SA 29:4 Certainly the princes of Philistines were wroth against Achish, and they said to him, The man turn again, and abide he in his place, in which thou hast ordained him, and come he not down with us into battle, lest he be made adversary to us, when we have begun to fight; for how may he please his lord in other manner, but in our heads?
1SA 29:5 Whether this is not David, to whom they sang in dances, and said, Saul smote in [[his]] thousands, and David smote in his ten thousands?
1SA 29:6 Therefore Achish called David, and said to him, The Lord liveth; for thou art rightful, and good in my sight, and thy going out and thy coming in is with me in [[the]] tents, and I have not found in thee anything of evil, from the day in which thou camest to me till to this day; but thou pleasest not the princes, or satraps.
1SA 29:7 Therefore turn thou again, and go in peace, and offend thou not the eyes of the princes, or satraps, of the Philistines.
1SA 29:8 And David said to Achish, And what have I done, and what hast thou found in me thy servant, from the day in which I was in thy sight till into this day, that I come not, and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?
1SA 29:9 And Achish answered, and spake to David, I know that thou art good, and as the angel of God in my eyes; but the princes of Philistines said, He shall not go up with us into battle.
1SA 29:10 Therefore rise thou up early, thou, and thy servants that came with thee; and when ye have risen by night, and it beginneth to be clear day, go ye forth.
1SA 29:11 Therefore David rose up by night, he and his men, that they should go forth early, and turn again to the land of Philistines; but the Philistines went up into Jezreel.
1SA 30:1 And when David and his men had come into Ziklag in the third day, they learned that men of Amalek had made assault on the south part of Judah, in Ziklag; and had smitten Ziklag, and burnt it by fire.
1SA 30:2 And they led away the women as prisoners from thence, from the least unto the most; and they had not slain any, but they led them forth with them, and went in their way.
1SA 30:3 Therefore when David and his men had come to the city, and had found it burnt with fire, and that their wives, and their sons, and daughters were led away as prisoners,
1SA 30:4 then David and the people that was with him raised [[up]] their voices, and wailed, till the tears failed in them.
1SA 30:5 And also [[the]] two wives of David were led away as prisoners, Ahinoam of Jezreel, and Abigail, the wife of Nabal of Carmel.
1SA 30:6 And David was full sorry; certainly all the people would have stoned David, for the soul of each man was bitter on their sons and daughters. Forsooth David was comforted in his Lord God.
1SA 30:7 And he said to Abiathar, the priest, the son of Ahimelech, Bring thou [[the]] ephod to me. And Abiathar brought the ephod to David;
1SA 30:8 and David counselled with the Lord, and said, Shall I pursue these thieves, either no? and shall I take them? And the Lord said to him, Pursue thou; for without doubt thou shalt take them, and thou shalt take away from them their prey.
1SA 30:9 Therefore David went forth, he and six hundred men that were with him, and they came unto the strand [[or stream]] of Besor; and there the weary men of the host of David abode behind.
1SA 30:10 Forsooth David pursued, he and four hundred men; for two hundred abided behind, that were weary, and might not pass [[over]] the strand [[or stream]] of Besor.
1SA 30:11 And they found a young man of Egypt in the field, and they brought him to David; and they gave him bread, that he should eat, and water to drink;
1SA 30:12 but also they gave to him a gobbet of a bundle of dried figs, and two clusters of dried grapes. And when he had eaten those, his spirit turned again to him, and he was comforted; for he had not eaten bread, neither had drunk water in three days and three nights.
1SA 30:13 Then David said to him, Whose man art thou, either from whence and whither goest thou? And he said, I am a child of Egypt, the servant of a man of Amalek; but my lord forsook me, for I began to be sick the third day ago.
1SA 30:14 For we brake out at the south coast of Cherethites, and against Judah, and at the south of Caleb, and we burnt Ziklag with fire.
1SA 30:15 And David said to him, Mayest thou lead me to this company? Which said, Swear thou to me by God, that thou shalt not slay me, and that thou shalt not betake me into the hands of my lord; and I shall lead thee to this company. And David swore to him.
1SA 30:16 And when the child had led him thither, lo! they sat at the meat, upon the face of all the earth, eating and drinking, and as hallowing a feast day, for all the prey and spoils which they had taken of the land of Philistines, and of the land of Judah.
1SA 30:17 And David smote them from the eventide unto the eventide of the tother day, and not any of them escaped, no but four hundred young men, that went upon camels, and fled.
1SA 30:18 Forsooth David delivered all things which the men of Amalek took, and he delivered his two wives;
1SA 30:19 neither any of them failed, from little till to great, as well of sons as of daughters, and of spoils; and what-ever things they had ravished, David led again all things;
1SA 30:20 and he took all the flocks and great beasts, and drove them before his face. And they said, This is the prey of David.
1SA 30:21 Forsooth David came to the two hundred men, that were weary, and abided behind, and might not follow David; and he [[had]] commanded them to sit at the strand [[or stream]] of Besor; which went out against David, and the people that was with him. Forsooth David nighed to the people, and he greeted it peaceably.
1SA 30:22 And one man, the worst and unjust [[or wicked]] of the men that were with David, answered, and said, For they came not with us, we shall not give to them anything of the prey, that we have ravished, but suffice it to each man his wife and his children; and when they have taken them, go they away.
1SA 30:23 And David said, My brethren, ye shall not do so, as ye speak, of these things, which the Lord hath given to us, and he hath kept us, and gave the thieves, that brake out against us, into our hands;
1SA 30:24 neither any shall hear us strive on this word. For even part shall be of him that goeth down to battle, and of him that dwelleth at the fardels; and in like manner they shall part the prey.
1SA 30:25 And this was made a constitution and a doom from that day and after-ward, and as a law in Israel till into this day.
1SA 30:26 Then David came into Ziklag, and he sent gifts of the prey to the elder men of Judah, his neighbours, and said, Take ye blessing of the prey of [[the]] enemies of the Lord;
1SA 30:27 to them that were in Bethel, and that were in Ramoth, at the south, and that were in Jattir,
1SA 30:28 and that were in Aroer, and that were in Siphmoth, and that were in Eshtemoa,
1SA 30:29 and that were in Rachal, and that were in the cities of Jerahmeel, and that were in the cities of Kenites,
1SA 30:30 and that were in Hormah, and that were in Chorashan, and that were in Athach,
1SA 30:31 and that were in Hebron, and to other men, that were in these places, in which David dwelled and his men.
1SA 31:1 Forsooth the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel fled before the face of Philistines, and they fell down slain in the hill of Gilboa.
1SA 31:2 And the Philistines hurled fiercely into Saul, and into his sons, and they killed Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchishua, [[the]] sons of Saul.
1SA 31:3 And all the weight or charge of the battle was turned against Saul; and men archers pursued him, and he was wounded greatly of the archers.
1SA 31:4 And Saul said to his squire, Draw out thy sword, and slay me, lest per-adventure these uncircumcised men come, and slay me, and scorn me. And his squire would not, for he was afeared by full great dread; therefore Saul took his sword, and felled thereon.
1SA 31:5 And when his squire had seen this, that Saul was dead, also he felled upon his sword, and was dead with him.
1SA 31:6 And so Saul was dead, and his three sons, and his squire, and all his men in that day together.
1SA 31:7 And the sons of Israel, that were beyond the valley, and beyond Jordan, saw that the men of Israel had fled, and that Saul was dead, and his sons, and they left their cities, and fled; and the Philistines came, and dwelled there.
1SA 31:8 Forsooth in the tother day made, Philistines came, that they should despoil the slain men, and they found Saul, and his three sons, lying in the hill of Gilboa;
1SA 31:9 and they cutted away the head of Saul, and despoiled him of his armours [[or arms]]; and sent into the land of Philistines by compass, that it should be told in the temple of idols, and in the peoples.
1SA 31:10 And they putted his armours [[or arms]] in the temple of Ashtaroth; but they hanged his body in the wall of Bethshan.
1SA 31:11 And when the dwellers of Jabesh of Gilead had heard this, and whatever things the Philistines had done to Saul,
1SA 31:12 and all the strongest men rose, and went forth all that night, and they took down the dead body of Saul, and the dead bodies of his sons, from the wall of Bethshan; and the men of Jabesh of Gilead came, and burnt those dead bodies with fire.
1SA 31:13 And they took the bones of them, and buried them in the wood of Jabesh, and fasted by seven days.
2SA 1:1 And it was done, after that Saul was dead, that David turned again from the slaying of Amalek, and he dwelled two days in Ziklag.
2SA 1:2 And in the third day a man appeared, coming from the tents of Saul with a cloth rent, and his head sprinkled with dust; and as he came to David, he felled upon his face, and worshipped or honoured him.
2SA 1:3 And David said to him, From whence comest thou? And he said to David, I fled from the tents of Israel.
2SA 1:4 And David said to him, What is the word that is done there; show thou to me. And he said, The people of Israel hath fled from the battle, and many of the people felled, and be dead; but also Saul, and Jonathan, his son, have perished.
2SA 1:5 And David said to the young man, that told to him, Whereof knowest thou, that Saul is dead, and Jonathan, his son?
2SA 1:6 And the young man said, that told to him, By hap I came into the hill of Gilboa, and Saul leaned upon his spear; and chariots and horsemen nighed to him;
2SA 1:7 and he turned behind his back, and saw me, and called. To whom when I had answered, I am present;
2SA 1:8 he said to me, Who art thou? And I said to him, I am a man of Amalek.
2SA 1:9 And he spake to me, Stand thou upon me, and slay me; for anguishes hold me, and yet all my life is in me.
2SA 1:10 And I stood upon him, and I slew him; for I knew that he might not live after the falling; and I took the diadem, that was on his head, and the bie from his arm, and I have brought them hither to thee, my lord.
2SA 1:11 Forsooth David took and rent his clothes, and [[all]] the men that were with him;
2SA 1:12 and they wailed, and wept, and fasted till to eventide, on Saul, and Jonathan, his son, and on the people of the Lord, and on the house of Israel, for they had felled by sword.
2SA 1:13 And David said to the young man, that told to him, Of whence art thou? And he answered, I am the son of a man comeling, of a man of Amalek.
2SA 1:14 And David said to him, Why dreadest thou not to send thine hand, that thou shouldest slay the christ of the Lord?
2SA 1:15 And David called one of his children or young men, and said, Go thou, and fall on him. And he smote that young man, and he was dead.
2SA 1:16 And David said to him, Thy blood be on thine head; for thy mouth spake against thee, and said, I killed the christ or the anointed of the Lord.
2SA 1:17 Forsooth David bewailed such a wailing on Saul, and on Jonathan, his son;
2SA 1:18 and he commanded, that they should teach the sons of Judah the bow, that is, the craft of shooting, as it is written in the Book of Just Men.
2SA 1:19 And David said, Israel, behold thou, for these that be dead, be wounded on thine high places; the noble men of Israel be slain upon thine hills. How have fallen [[the]] strong men?
2SA 1:20 do not ye tell this in Gath, neither tell ye in the way-lots of Askelon; lest peradventure the daughters of Philis-tines be glad, lest the daughters of uncircumcised men joy.
2SA 1:21 Hills of Gilboa, neither dew, neither rain come upon you, neither be they the fields of first fruits; for the shield of strong men was cast away there, the shield of Saul, as if he had not been anointed with oil.
2SA 1:22 Of the blood of slain men, of the fatness of strong men, the arrow of Jonathan went never aback, and the sword of Saul turned not again void.
2SA 1:23 Saul and Jonathan, amiable, and fair in their life, were not parted also in their death; they were swifter than eagles, stronger than lions.
2SA 1:24 Daughters of Israel, weep ye on Saul, that clothed you with fine red, and in other delights, that gave golden ornaments to your attire.
2SA 1:25 How have strong men fallen down in battle? Jonathan was slain in the high places.
2SA 1:26 I make sorrow upon thee, my brother Jonathan, full fair and amiable more than the love of women; as a mother loveth her only son, so I loved thee.
2SA 1:27 How therefore felled down strong men, and arms of battle perished?
2SA 2:1 Therefore after these things David counselled with the Lord, and said, Whether I shall go up into one of the cities of Judah? And the Lord said to him, Go thou up. And David said to the Lord, Whither shall I go up? And the Lord answered to him, Into Hebron.
2SA 2:2 Therefore David went up, and his two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel, and Abigail, the wife of Nabal of Carmel.
2SA 2:3 But also David led the men that were with him, each man with his house; and they dwelled in the towns of Hebron.
2SA 2:4 And the men of Judah came, and anointed there David, that he should reign upon the house of Judah. And it was told to David, that [[the]] men of Jabesh of Gilead had buried Saul.
2SA 2:5 Therefore David sent messengers to the men of Jabesh of Gilead, and said to them, Blessed be ye of the Lord, that did this mercy with your lord Saul, and buried him.
2SA 2:6 And now soothly the Lord shall yield to you mercy and truth, but also I shall yield thanking, for ye did this word.
2SA 2:7 Your hands be comforted, and be ye the sons of strength; for though your lord Saul is dead, nevertheless the house of Judah hath anointed me king to him.
2SA 2:8 Forsooth Abner, the son of Ner, prince of the host of Saul, took Ishbosheth, the son of Saul, and led him about by the castles [[or tents]],
2SA 2:9 and made him king on Gilead, and on Ashurites, and on Jezreel, and on Ephraim, and on Benjamin, and on all Israel.
2SA 2:10 Ishbosheth, the son of Saul, was of forty years, when he began to reign upon Israel; and he reigned two years. Soothly the house alone of Judah pursued [[or followed]] David.
2SA 2:11 And the number of days, by which David dwelled reigning in Hebron on the house of Judah, was of seven years and six months.
2SA 2:12 And Abner, the son of Ner, went out, and the children or young men of Ishbosheth, the son of Saul, from the castles [[or tents]] in[[to]] Gibeon.
2SA 2:13 And Joab, the son of Zeruiah, and the children of David, went out, and they came to them beside the cistern of Gibeon. And when they had come together into one place even against either other, these sat on one part of the cistern, and they on the tother.
2SA 2:14 And Abner said to Joab, The children rise, and play before us. And Joab answered, Rise they up.
2SA 2:15 Then they rose up, and passed forth twelve in number of Benjamin, of the part of Ishbosheth, the son of Saul; and twelve of the servants of David.
2SA 2:16 And each man, when he had taken his fellow by the head, fixed his sword into the side of his adversary; and they felled down together. And the name of that place was called The Field of Men Slain Together, in Gibeon.
2SA 2:17 And full hard battle rose in that day; and Abner and the sons of Israel were driven away of the servants of David.
2SA 2:18 Forsooth three sons of Zeruiah were there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel; and Asahel was a full swift runner, as one of the caprets that dwell in woods.
2SA 2:19 And Asahel pursued Abner, and he bowed neither to the right side, nor to the left side, ceasing to pursue Abner.
2SA 2:20 Therefore Abner beheld behind his back, and said, Whether thou art Asahel? Which answered, I am.
2SA 2:21 And Abner said to him, Go thou to the right side, either to the left side; and take one of the young men, and take to thee his spoils. But Asahel would not cease, that not he pursued him.
2SA 2:22 And again Abner spake to Asahel, Go thou away; do not thou pursue me, lest I be compelled to pierce thee into the earth, and I shall not be able to raise then my face to Joab, thy brother.
2SA 2:23 And Asahel despised to hear, and would not bow away. Therefore Abner smote him with the spear turned away, that is, turned against him, in the share-bone, that is, behind the maw, in the fifth rib, under which be the members of life, and pierced [[him]] through, and he was dead in the same place; and all men that passed by the place, in which place Asahel felled down, and was dead, stood still.
2SA 2:24 And while Joab and Abishai pursued Abner fleeing, the sun went down; and they came to the little hill of a water conduit, that is even against the valley, and the way of desert in Gibeon.
2SA 2:25 And the sons of Benjamin were gathered to Abner, and they were gathered together into one company, and they stood in the height of an heap of earth.
2SA 2:26 And Abner cried to Joab, and said, Whether thy sword shall be fierce unto slaying? Whether thou knowest not, that despair is perilous? How long sayest thou not to the people, that it cease to pursue his brethren?
2SA 2:27 And Joab said, The Lord liveth, for if thou haddest spoken thus early, the people pursuing his brother had gone away.
2SA 2:28 And Joab sounded with a clarion, and all the host stood still; and they pursued no further Israel, neither began battle.
2SA 2:29 And Abner and his men went from thence by the field places of Moab in all that night, and they passed [[over]] Jordan; and when all Bithron was compassed, they came to the castles [[or tents]].
2SA 2:30 And when Abner was left off, Joab turned again, and gathered together all his people; and ten men and nine, besides Asahel, failed of the servants of David.
2SA 2:31 Forsooth the servants of David smited of Benjamin, and of the men that were with Abner, three hundred men and sixty, which also were dead.
2SA 2:32 And they took Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father in Bethlehem. And Joab, and the men that were with him, went in all that night, and in that morrowtide they came into Hebron.
2SA 3:1 Therefore a long strife was made betwixt the house of David and the house of Saul; and David profited and ever[[more]] was stronger than himself, in comparison of time passed, for his power increased ever, but the house of Saul decreased each day.
2SA 3:2 And sons were born to David in Hebron; and his first begotten son was Amnon, of Ahinoam of Jezreel;
2SA 3:3 and after him was Chileab, of Abigail, the wife of Nabal of Carmel; and the third was Absalom, the son of Maacah, the daughter of Talmai, king of Geshur;
2SA 3:4 and the fourth was Adonijah, the son of Haggith; and the fifth was Shephatiah, the son of Abital;
2SA 3:5 and the sixth was Ithream, of Eglah, the wife of David. These were born to David in Hebron.
2SA 3:6 Therefore when battle was betwixt the house of Saul and the house of David, Abner, the son of Ner, governed the house of Saul.
2SA 3:7 And to Saul was a concubine, that is, a secondary wife, Rizpah by name, the daughter of Aiah; and Abner entered [[in]] to her. And Ishbosheth said to Abner, Why hast thou entered [[in]] to the concubine of my father?
2SA 3:8 And Abner was wroth greatly for the words of Ishbosheth, and said, Whether I am the head of a dog against Judah today, and I have done mercy on the house of Saul, thy father, and on his brethren, and neighbours, and I betook not thee into the hands of David, and thou hast sought in me that, that thou shouldest reprove for a woman today?
2SA 3:9 God do these things to Abner, and add these things to him, no but as the Lord swore to David, so I do with him,
2SA 3:10 that the realm be translated from the house of Saul, and the throne of David be raised on Israel and on Judah, from Dan till to Beersheba.
2SA 3:11 And Ishbosheth might not answer anything to Abner, for he dreaded Abner.
2SA 3:12 Therefore Abner sent messengers to David, and they said for him, Whose is the land? and that the messengers should speak thus, Make thou friend-ships with me, and mine hand shall be with thee, and I shall bring all Israel to thee.
2SA 3:13 And David said, Best, I shall make friendships with thee; but I ask of thee one thing, and say, Thou shalt not see my face, before that thou bring Michal, the daughter of Saul, and so thou shalt come, and shalt see me.
2SA 3:14 Therefore David sent messengers to Ishbosheth, the son of Saul, and said, Yield thou my wife Michal, whom I espoused to me for an hundred prepuces of Philistines.
2SA 3:15 Therefore Ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, Phaltiel, the son of Laish;
2SA 3:16 and her husband pursued [[or followed]] her, and wept till to Bahurim. And Abner said to him, Go thou, and turn again; and he turned again.
2SA 3:17 Also Abner brought in a word to the elder men of Israel, and said, Both yesterday and the third day ago ye sought David, that he should reign upon you.
2SA 3:18 Now therefore do ye; for the Lord spake to David, and said, In the hand of my servant David I shall save my people Israel from the hand of Philistines, and of all his enemies.
2SA 3:19 And also Abner spake to Benjamin; and he went, that he should speak to David, in Hebron, all things that pleased Israel and all Benjamin.
2SA 3:20 And he came to David, in Hebron, with twenty men. And David made a feast to Abner, and to the men that came with him.
2SA 3:21 And Abner said to David, I shall rise up, that I gather all Israel to thee, my lord the king, and that I make bond of peace with thee, and that thou reign on all, as thy soul desireth. Therefore when David had led forth Abner, and he had gone in peace,
2SA 3:22 anon the children of David and Joab came with a full great prey, when the thieves were slain; and Abner was not then with David, in Hebron, for David had let him go, and he went forth in peace.
2SA 3:23 And Joab, and the hosts that were with him, came afterward; therefore it was told to Joab of tellers, Abner, the son of Ner, came to the king, and the king let him go, and he went forth in peace.
2SA 3:24 And Joab entered to the king, and said, What hast thou done? Lo! Abner came to thee; why lettest thou him go, and he went, and departed from thee?
2SA 3:25 Knowest thou not Abner, the son of Ner, for hereto he came to thee, that he should deceive thee, and that he should know thy going out and thine entering, and should know all things which thou doest?
2SA 3:26 Therefore Joab went out from David, and sent messengers after Abner; and led him again from the cistern of Sirah, while David knew not.
2SA 3:27 And when Abner had come again into Hebron, Joab led him asides half to the middle of the gate, that he should speak to him in guile; and he smote Abner there in the share-bone, and he was dead, into vengeance of the blood of his brother Asahel.
2SA 3:28 That when David had heard this thing done, he said, I am clean, and my realm, with God into without end from the blood of Abner, the son of Ner;
2SA 3:29 and come it on the head of Joab, and upon all the house of his father; and fail there not from the house of Joab a man suffering flowing of seed, and a leprous man, and a man holding a spindle, and a man falling by sword, and a man having need to bread.
2SA 3:30 Therefore Joab, and Abishai, his brother, killed Abner, for he had slain Asahel, their brother, in Gibeon, in battle.
2SA 3:31 And David said to Joab, and to all the people that was with him, Rend ye your clothes, and be ye gird with sackcloths, and bewail ye before the hearses, either dirge, of Abner. Forsooth king David pursued [[or followed]] the bier.
2SA 3:32 And when they had buried Abner in Hebron, king David raised his voice, and wept on the burial of Abner; and certainly all the people wept.
2SA 3:33 And the king bewailed, and be-mourned Abner, and said, Abner, thou diedest not as dreadful men, either cowards, be wont to die.
2SA 3:34 Thine hands were not bound, and thy feet were not grieved with stocks, but thou hast fallen down, as men be wont to fall before the sons of wicked-ness. And all the people doubled together, and wept on him.
2SA 3:35 And when all the multitude came to take meat with David, while the day was yet clear, David swore, and said, God do to me these things, and add these things too, if I shall taste bread, either any other thing, before the going down of the sun.
2SA 3:36 And all the people heard this; and all things which the king did in the sight of all the people pleased them;
2SA 3:37 and all the common people and all Israel knew in that day, that it was not done of the king, that Abner, the son of Ner, was slain.
2SA 3:38 Also the king said to his servants, Whether ye know not, that the prince and the greatest hath fallen down today in Israel?
2SA 3:39 And I am yet tender, and anointed king; and these sons of Zeruiah be hard to me; the Lord yield to him that doeth evil after his malice.
2SA 4:1 And Ishbosheth, the son of Saul, heard that Abner had fallen down in Hebron; and his hands were discomfort-ed, and all Israel was troubled.
2SA 4:2 And two men, princes of companies, were to the son of Saul; name to the one was Baanah, and name to the tother was Rechab, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the sons of Benjamin; for also Beeroth is areckoned in Benjamin.
2SA 4:3 And men of Beeroth fled into Gittaim; and they were comelings there till to that time.
2SA 4:4 And a son feeble in his feet was to Jonathan, the son of Saul; and he was five years eld [[or old]], when the messenger came from Saul and Jonathan, from Jezreel, telling that they were dead. Therefore his nurse took him, and fled; and when she hasted to flee, she felled down, and the child was made lame; and the name of the child was Mephibosheth.
2SA 4:5 Therefore Rechab and Baanah, the sons of Rimmon of Beeroth, came, and entered in the hot day into the house of Ishbosheth, that slept upon his bed at midday; and the woman that kept the doors of the house, who had been purging wheat, now slept fast.
2SA 4:6 And they came till to the midst of the house, and took wheat; and Rechab, and Baanah, his brother, smote Ishbo-sheth in the share-bone, and fled.
2SA 4:7 Soothly when they had entered into the house, he slept on his bed in a bed-closet; and they smited and killed him; and when they had taken [[off]] his head, they went by the way of desert in all that night.
2SA 4:8 And they brought the head of Ishbosheth to David, in Hebron, and they said to the king, Lo! the head of Ishbosheth, the son of Saul, thine enemy, that sought thy life; and the Lord hath given today to our lord the king vengeance of Saul, and of his seed.
2SA 4:9 And David answered to Rechab, and Baanah, his brother, the sons of Rimmon of Beeroth, and said to them, The Lord liveth, that hath delivered my life from all anguish,;
2SA 4:10 for I held him that told to me, and said, Saul is dead, which man guessed himself to tell prosperities, and I killed him in Ziklag, to whom it behooved me give meed for his message;
2SA 4:11 how much more now, when wicked men have slain a guiltless man in his house upon his bed, shall I not seek his blood of your hand, and shall not I do away you from the earth?
2SA 4:12 Therefore David commanded to his servants, and they killed them; and they cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them over the cistern in Hebron. Forsooth they took the head of Ishbosheth, and they buried it in the sepulchre of Abner, in Hebron.
2SA 5:1 And all the lineages of Israel came to David, in Hebron, and said, Lo! we be thy bone and thy flesh.
2SA 5:2 But also yesterday and the third day ago, when Saul was king upon us, thou leddest out, and leddest again Israel; forsooth the Lord said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be duke upon Israel.
2SA 5:3 Also and the elder men of Israel came to the king, into Hebron; and king David smote with them bond of peace in Hebron, before the Lord; and they anointed David into king upon Israel.
2SA 5:4 David was a son of thirty years, when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years
2SA 5:5 in Hebron; he reigned upon Judah seven years and six months; and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years upon all Israel and Judah.
2SA 5:6 And the king went, and all [[the]] men that were with him, into Jerusalem, to Jebusites, the dwellers of the land. And it was said of them to David, Thou shalt not enter hither, no but thou do away blind men and lame, saying, David shall not enter hither.
2SA 5:7 Forsooth David took the tower of Zion; this is the city of David.
2SA 5:8 For David had purposed in that day to have given meed to him, that had smitten Jebusites, and that had touched the gutters of the house roofs, and that had taken away lame men and blind, hating the life of David. Therefore it is said in common speech, A blind man and a lame shall not enter into the temple.
2SA 5:9 And David dwelled in the tower, and called it the city of David; and he builded by compass from Millo, and within.
2SA 5:10 And he entered profiting, and increasing; and the Lord God of hosts was with him.
2SA 5:11 Also Hiram, king of Tyre, sent messengers to David, and cedar trees, and craftsmen of wood, and craftsmen of stones to make walls; and they builded the house of David.
2SA 5:12 And David knew, that the Lord had confirmed him king upon Israel, and that he had enhanced his realm upon his people Israel.
2SA 5:13 Therefore David took yet more concubines, and wives of Jerusalem, after that he came from Hebron; and also other sons and daughters were born to David.
2SA 5:14 And these be the names of them that were born to him in Jerusalem; Shammuah, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,
2SA 5:15 and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
2SA 5:16 and Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet.
2SA 5:17 Then the Philistines heard, that they had anointed David king upon Israel, and all the Philistines went up to seek David. And when David had heard this, he went down into a stronghold.
2SA 5:18 And the Philistines came, and they were spread abroad in the valley of Rephaim.
2SA 5:19 And David counselled with the Lord, and said, Whether I shall go up to Philistines, and whether thou shalt give them into mine hand? And the Lord said to David, Go thou up, for I shall betake the Philistines, and I shall give them into thine hand.
2SA 5:20 Therefore David came into Baal-perazim, and smote them there, and said, The Lord hath parted mine enemies before me, as waters be parted. Therefore the name of that place was called Baalperazim, that is, The Field, either Plain, of Parting.
2SA 5:21 And they left there their sculptures, or their images, which David burnt, and his men.
2SA 5:22 And [[the]] Philistines added yet, that they should ascend [[or go up]], and they were spread abroad in the valley of Rephaim.
2SA 5:23 And David counselled with the Lord, and said, Whether I shall go up against the Philistines, and whether thou shalt betake them into mine hands? And the Lord answered, Thou shalt not go up against them, but compass thou them behind their back, and thou shalt come to them on the contrary side of the pear trees.
2SA 5:24 And when thou shalt hear the sound of cry going in the tops of pear trees, then thou shalt begin battle; for then the Lord shall go out before thy face, that he smite the tents of Philistines.
2SA 5:25 Therefore David did as the Lord commanded to him; and he smote the Philistines from Geba till they came to Gazer.
2SA 6:1 Forsooth David gathered again all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand.
2SA 6:2 And David rose, and went, and all the people that was with him of the men of Judah, to bring the ark of God, on which the name of the Lord of hosts, sitting in cherubim on that ark, was called.
2SA 6:3 And they putted [[or put]] the ark of God on a new wain, and they took it from the house of Abinadab, that was in Gibeah. And Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drove the new wain.
2SA 6:4 And when they had taken it from the house of Abinadab, that was in Gibeah, and kept the ark of God, Ahio went before the ark.
2SA 6:5 And David and all Israel played before the Lord, in all treen instruments of melody, and in harps, and citoles, and tympans, and trumps, and cymbals.
2SA 6:6 Forsooth after that they came to the cornfloor of Nachon, Uzzah held forth his hand to the ark of God, and held it, for the oxen kicked, and bowed it.
2SA 6:7 And the Lord was wroth by indignation against Uzzah, and smote him on the folly; and he was dead there beside the ark of God.
2SA 6:8 And David was sorry, for the Lord had slain Uzzah; and the name of that place was called The Smiting of Uzzah till into this day.
2SA 6:9 And David dreaded the Lord in that day, and said, How shall the ark of the Lord enter to me?
2SA 6:10 And he would not turn [[aside]] the ark of the Lord to himself into the city of David, but he turned it [[aside]] into the house of Obededom of Gath.
2SA 6:11 And the ark of the Lord dwelled in the house of Obededom of Gath three months; and the Lord blessed Obededom, and all his house.
2SA 6:12 And it was told to king David, that the Lord had blessed Obededom, and all his things, for the ark of God. And David said, I shall go, and bring the ark with blessing into mine house. Therefore David went, and brought the ark of God from the house of Obededom into the city of David with joy.
2SA 6:13 And when they, that bare the ark of the Lord, had gone six paces, they offered an ox and a ram.
2SA 6:14 And David smote in organs fastened to his arm; and he danced with all his strengths before the Lord; and David was clothed with a linen surplice.
2SA 6:15 And David, and all the house of Israel, led forth the ark of [[the]] testament or of [[the]] witnessing of the Lord in hearty song, and in sound of trump.
2SA 6:16 And when the ark of the Lord had entered into the city of David, Michal, the daughter of Saul, beheld by a window, and she saw the king skipping or hopping and dancing before the Lord; and she despised him in her heart.
2SA 6:17 And they brought in the ark of the Lord, and setted [[or put]] it in his place, in the midst of the tabernacle, which tabernacle David had made therefore or had made ready thereto; and David offered burnt sacrifices and peaceable sacrifices before the Lord.
2SA 6:18 And when David had ended those [[or them]], and had offered burnt sacrifices and peaceable sacrifices, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts.
2SA 6:19 And he gave to all the multitude of Israel, as well to man as to woman, to each a cake of bread, and one part roasted of bugle flesh, and flour of wheat fried with oil; and all the people went forth, each into his house.
2SA 6:20 And David turned again to bless his house, and Michal, the daughter of Saul, went out into the coming of David, and said, How glorious was the king of Israel today, uncovering himself before the handmaids of his servants, and he was made naked, as if one of the knaves had been made naked?
2SA 6:21 And David said to Michal, The Lord liveth, for I shall play, or I shall dance, before the Lord, that chose me rather than thy father, and rather than all the house of him, and commanded to me, that I should be duke on the people of the Lord of Israel; and I shall play,
2SA 6:22 and I shall be made more vile than I am yet made, and I shall be meek in mine eyes, and I shall appear more glorious with those handmaidens, of which thou hast spoken.
2SA 6:23 Therefore a son was not born to Michal, the daughter of Saul, till into the day of her death.
2SA 7:1 Forsooth it was done, when king David had sat in his house, and the Lord had given rest to him on each side from all his enemies,
2SA 7:2 he said to Nathan the prophet, Seest thou not, that I dwell in an house of cedar, and the ark of God is put in the midst of skins?
2SA 7:3 And Nathan said to the king, Go thou, and do all thing that is in thine heart, for the Lord is with thee.
2SA 7:4 And it was done in that night, and lo! the word of the Lord, was made to Nathan, [[saying]],
2SA 7:5 Go thou, and speak to my servant David, The Lord saith these things, Whether thou shalt build to me an house to dwell in?
2SA 7:6 Soothly I have not dwelled in an house from the day in which I led the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt till into this day; but I have gone in a tabernacle and in a tent,
2SA 7:7 by all places, to which I passed with all the sons of Israel? Whether I speaking spake to anyone of the lineages of Israel, to whom I commanded, that he should feed my people Israel, and said, Why builded-est thou not an house of cedar to me?
2SA 7:8 And now thou shalt say these things to my servant David, The Lord of hosts saith these things, I took thee from [[the]] pastures following flocks, that thou shouldest be duke on my people Israel,
2SA 7:9 and I was with thee in all things, wherever thou hast gone, and I have killed all thine enemies from thy face, and I have made to thee a great name, by the name of great men that be in earth;
2SA 7:10 and I shall set a place to my people Israel, and I shall plant him, and I shall dwell with him, and he shall no more be troubled, and the sons of wickedness shall not add to, that they torment him as before,
2SA 7:11 like they did from the day in which I ordained judges upon my people Israel; and I shall give rest to thee from all thine enemies. And the Lord before-saith to thee, that he shall make an house to thee;
2SA 7:12 and when thy days be fulfilled, and thou hast slept with thy fathers, that is, when thou hast died, I shall raise up thy seed after thee, which shall go out of thy womb, and I shall make steadfast his realm.
2SA 7:13 He shall build an house to my name, and I shall make stable the throne of his realm till into without end;
2SA 7:14 I shall be to him into a father, and he shall be to me into a son; and if he shall do anything wickedly, I shall chastise him in the rod of men, and in the wounds of the sons of men.
2SA 7:15 Forsooth I shall not do away my mercy from him, as I did it away from Saul, whom I removed from my face.
2SA 7:16 And thine house shall be faithful, and thy realm shall be till into without end before my face, and thy throne shall be steadfast continually.
2SA 7:17 By all these words, and by all this revelation, so Nathan spake to David.
2SA 7:18 Forsooth David the king entered into the tabernacle, and he sat before the Lord, and said, Who am I, Lord God, and what is mine house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?
2SA 7:19 But also this is seen little in thy sight, my Lord God; no but thou shouldest speak also of the house of thy servant into long time. For this is the law of Adam, Lord God;
2SA 7:20 what therefore may David add yet, that he speak to thee? For thou, Lord God, knowest thy servant;
2SA 7:21 thou hast done all these great things, for thy word, and by thine heart, so that thou madest those known to thy servant.
2SA 7:22 Therefore, Lord God, thou art made great, for none is like thee, nor there is no God except thee, in all things which we have heard with our ears.
2SA 7:23 Soothly what folk in earth is as the people of Israel, for which the Lord God went, that he should again-buy it to him into a people, and should set to himself a name, and should do to it great things, and horrible, on [[the]] earth, in casting out thereof the folks, and gods thereof, from the face of thy people, which thou again-boughtest to thee from Egypt?
2SA 7:24 And thou hast confirmed to thee thy people Israel into a people ever-lasting, and thou, Lord, art made into God to them.
2SA 7:25 Now therefore, Lord God, raise up without end the word that thou hast spoken upon thy servant, and upon his house, and do as thou hast spoken;
2SA 7:26 and thy name be magnified or be made great till into without end, and be it said, The Lord of hosts is God upon Israel; and the house of thy servant David shall be stablished before the Lord;
2SA 7:27 for thou, Lord of hosts, God of Israel, hast made revelation to the ear of thy servant, and saidest, I shall build an house to thee; therefore thy servant hath found by his heart, that he should pray thee by this prayer.
2SA 7:28 Now therefore, Lord God, thou art very God, and thy words shall be true; for thou hast spoken these good things to thy servant;
2SA 7:29 therefore begin thou, and bless the house of thy servant, that it be into without end before thee; for thou, Lord God, hast spoken these things, and through thy blessing the house of thy servant shall be blessed without end.
2SA 8:1 And it was done after these things, David smote the Philistines, and made low them; and David took away the bridle of tribute from the hand of Philistines.
2SA 8:2 And David smote Moab, and meted them with a cord, and he made them even to the earth; forsooth he meted them by two cords, one to slay, and one to quicken. And Moab served David under tribute.
2SA 8:3 And David smote Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, when he went forth to be lord over the flood Euphrates.
2SA 8:4 And when a thousand and seven hundred horsemen of his part were taken, and twenty thousand of foot-men, David hocked all [[the]] drawing beasts in chariots; but David left of those [[or them]] an hundred chariots, that is, the horses of an hundred chariots.
2SA 8:5 Also Syrians of Damascus came, that it should bear help to Hadadezer, king of Zobah; and David smote of Syrians two and twenty thousand of men.
2SA 8:6 And David setted [[or put]] a strong-hold in Syria of Damascus, and Syria was made serving David under tribute. And the Lord kept David in all things, to whatever things he went forth.
2SA 8:7 And David took golden armours and bies, which the servants of Hadadezer had, and he brought those [[or them]] into Jerusalem.
2SA 8:8 And of Betah, and of Berothai, the cities of Hadadezer, David [[the]] king took full much brass.
2SA 8:9 Forsooth Toi, king of Hamath, heard that David had smitten all the host of Hadadezer.
2SA 8:10 And Toi sent Joram, his son, to king David, that he should greet him, and thank, and do thankings, for he had overcome Hadadezer, and had smitten him; for Toi was enemy of Hadadezer; and vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass were in his hand.
2SA 8:11 And the same vessels king David hallowed to the Lord, with the silver and gold, which he had hallowed of all heathen men, which he had made subject
2SA 8:12 of Syria, and of Moab, and of the sons of Ammon, and of Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoils of Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah.
2SA 8:13 Also David made to him a name, when he turned again when Syria was taken, for eighteen thousand men were slain in the valley, where salt was made, and in Helam, to three and twenty thousand.
2SA 8:14 And he setted keepers in Idumea, and ordained [[a]] stronghold, and all Idumea was made serving to David; and the Lord kept David in all things, to whatever things he went forth.
2SA 8:15 And David reigned upon all Israel, and David did doom, and rightwise-ness to all his people.
2SA 8:16 And Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was over the host of David; and Jehosha-phat, the son of Ahilud, was recorder;
2SA 8:17 and Zadok, the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech, the son of Abiathar, were priests; and Seraiah was a scribe.
2SA 8:18 But Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, was over Cherethites and Pelethites, that is, over archers and arrowblasters; and the sons of David were priests.
2SA 9:1 And David said, Whether any man is, that is left of the house of Saul, that I do mercy with him for Jonathan?
2SA 9:2 And there was a servant, Ziba by name, of the house of Saul; whom when the king had called to himself, the king said to him, Whether thou art not Ziba? And he answered, I am thy servant.
2SA 9:3 And the king said, Whether any man liveth of the house of Saul, that I do with him the mercy of God? And Ziba said to the king, A son of Jonathan liveth, feeble in the feet.
2SA 9:4 And the king said, Where is he? And Ziba said to the king, Lo! he is in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in Lodebar.
2SA 9:5 Therefore king David sent, and took Jonathan’s son from the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, from Lodebar.
2SA 9:6 And when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, [[the]] son of Saul, had come to David, he felled into his face, and worshipped. And David said, Mephibosheth! And he answered, I am present, thy servant.
2SA 9:7 And David said to him, Dread thou not, for I doing shall do mercy to thee for Jonathan, thy father; and I shall restore to thee all the fields of Saul, thy father, and thou shalt eat bread in my table ever[[more]].
2SA 9:8 Which worshipped him, and said, Who am I, thy servant, for thou hast beheld on a dead dog like me?
2SA 9:9 Therefore the king called Ziba, the child of Saul; and said to him, I have given to the son of thy lord all things, whichever were of Saul, and all the house of him;
2SA 9:10 therefore work thou the land to him, thou, and thy sons, and thy servants, and thou shalt bring in meats to the son of thy lord, that he be fed; but Mephibosheth, the son of thy lord, shall eat ever bread on my board. And fifteen sons and twenty servants were to Ziba.
2SA 9:11 And Ziba said to the king, As thou, my lord the king, hast commanded to thy servant, so thy servant shall do; and Mephibosheth, as one of the sons of the king, shall eat on thy board.
2SA 9:12 And Mephibosheth had a little son, Micha by name; and all the family of the house of Ziba served Mephibosheth.
2SA 9:13 And Mephibosheth dwelled in Jerusalem; for he ate continually of the king’s board, and was crooked, or halt, on either foot.
2SA 10:1 Forsooth it was done after these things, that Nahash, [[the]] king of the sons of Ammon, died; and Hanun, his son, reigned for him,.
2SA 10:2 And David said, I shall do mercy with Hanun, the son of Nahash, as his father did mercy with me. There-fore David sent comforting to him by his servants on the death of the father. And when the servants of David had come into the land of the sons of Ammon,
2SA 10:3 the princes of the sons of Ammon said to Hanun, their lord, Guessest thou, that for the honour of thy father David hath sent comforters to thee; and not rather therefore David sent his servants to thee, that he should espy, and ensearch the city, and destroy it?
2SA 10:4 Therefore Hanun took the servants of David, and shaved half the part of the beard of them, and he cutted away the middle clothes of them, till to the buttocks; and let them go.
2SA 10:5 And when this was told to David, he sent into the coming of them, for the men were shamed full vilely. And David commanded to them, Dwell ye in Jericho, till your beard waxed, and then turn ye again.
2SA 10:6 And the sons of Ammon saw, that they had done wrong to David, and they sent, and hired with meed of Bethrehob of Syria, and of Zoba of Syria, twenty thousand of footmen, and of king Maacah, a thousand men, and of Ishtob, twelve thousand of men.
2SA 10:7 And when David had heard this, he sent Joab, and all the host of fighters.
2SA 10:8 Therefore the sons of Ammon went out, and dressed battle array before them in the entering of the gate. And Zoba, and Rehob of Syria, and Ishtob, and Maacah, were asides half in the field.
2SA 10:9 Therefore Joab saw, that the battle was made ready against him, both even against him and behind his back; and he chose to himself of all the chosen men of Israel, and ordained battle array against Syrians.
2SA 10:10 Forsooth he betook to Abishai, his brother, the tother part of the people, which dressed battle array against the sons of Ammon.
2SA 10:11 And Joab said, If men of Syria have the mastery against me, thou shalt be to me into help; and if the sons of Ammon have the mastery against thee, I shall help thee;
2SA 10:12 be thou a strong man, and fight we for our people, and for the city of our God; for the Lord shall do that, that is good in his sight.
2SA 10:13 Therefore Joab and the people that was with him, began battle against men of Syria, which fled anon from his face.
2SA 10:14 And the sons of Ammon saw, that [[the]] men of Syria had fled; and they fled also from the face of Abishai, and entered into the city; and Joab turned again from the sons of Ammon, and came into Jerusalem.
2SA 10:15 And [[the]] men of Syria saw that they had fallen before Israel, and they were gathered together.
2SA 10:16 And Hadadezer sent, and led out [[the]] men of Syria that were beyond the flood, and he brought forth the host of them; and Shobach, [[the]] master of the chivalry of Hadadezer, was the prince of them.
2SA 10:17 And when this was told to David, he drew together all Israel, and he passed over Jordan, and came into Helam. And [[the]] men of Syria dressed battle array against David, and fought against him.
2SA 10:18 And Syrians fled from the face of Israel; and David killed of the Syrians the men in seven hundred chariots, and forty thousand of horsemen; and he smote Shobach, the prince of the chivalry, the which was dead anon.
2SA 10:19 And all the kings, that were in help of Hadadezer, saw that they were overcome of Israel, and they made peace with Israel, and served them; and the Syrians dreaded to give help to the sons of Ammon.
2SA 11:1 And it was done, when the year turned again, in that time in which kings be wont to go forth to battles, David sent forth Joab, and with him his servants, and all Israel; and they destroyed the sons of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah; and David dwelled in Jerusalem.
2SA 11:2 While these things were done, it befelled, that David rose in a day from his bed after midday, and walked in the solar of the king’s house; and he saw a woman washing herself even against him upon her solar; and the woman was full fair.
2SA 11:3 Therefore the king sent, and inquired, what woman it was; and it was told to him that she was Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, and she was the wife of Uriah the Hittite.
2SA 11:4 Then by messengers sent, David took her; and when she entered to him, he slept with her, and anon she was hallowed from her uncleanness. And she turned again into her house,
2SA 11:5 with a child conceived; and she sent, and told to David, and said, I have conceived.
2SA 11:6 And David sent to Joab, and said, Send thou Uriah the Hittite to me; and Joab sent Uriah to David.
2SA 11:7 And Uriah came to David; and David asked, how rightfully Joab did and the people, and how the battle was administered, or served.
2SA 11:8 And David said to Uriah, Go into thine house, and wash thy feet. [[And]] Uriah went out from the house of the king, and the king’s meat pursued [[or followed]] him.
2SA 11:9 Soothly Uriah slept before the gate of the king’s house with other servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.
2SA 11:10 And it was told to David of men, saying, Uriah went not to his house. And David said to Uriah, Whether thou camest not from the way? why wentest thou not down into thine house?
2SA 11:11 And Uriah said to David, The ark of God, [[and]] Israel, and Judah dwell in tents, and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord dwell upon the face of the earth, and shall I go into mine house, to eat and drink, and sleep with my wife? By thine health, and by the health of thy soul, I shall not do this thing.
2SA 11:12 Therefore David said to Uriah, Dwell thou here also today, and tomorrow I shall deliver thee. Uriah dwelled in Jerusalem in that day, and the tother.
2SA 11:13 And David called him, that he should eat and drink before him, and David made drunken Uriah; and he went out in the eventide, and slept in his bed with the servants of his lord; and went not down into his house.
2SA 11:14 Therefore when the morrowtide was made, David wrote [[an]] epistle to Joab, and sent by the hand of Uriah,
2SA 11:15 and wrote in the epistle, Put ye Uriah even against the battle, where the battle is strongest, that is, where the adversaries be strongest, and forsake ye him, that he be smitten and perish.
2SA 11:16 Therefore when Joab besieged the city, he setted [[or put]] Uriah in the place where he knew that strongest men were.
2SA 11:17 And [[the]] men went out of the city, and fought against Joab, and they killed of the people of the servants of David, and also Uriah the Hittite was dead there.
2SA 11:18 Therefore Joab sent, and told all the words of the battle;
2SA 11:19 and he commanded to the mes-senger, and said, When thou hast fulfilled all the words of the battle to the king,
2SA 11:20 if thou seest, that he is wroth, and saith, Why nighed ye to the wall to fight? whether ye knew not, that many darts, or arrows, be sent out from the wall above?
2SA 11:21 who smote Abimelech, the son of Jerubbesheth? whether not a woman sent on him a gobbet of a millstone from the wall, and killed him in Thebez? why nighed ye beside the wall? thou shalt say, Also thy servant, Uriah the Hittite, died.
2SA 11:22 Therefore the messenger went, [[and came]], and told to David all things which Joab had commanded to him.
2SA 11:23 And the messenger said to David, [[The]] Men had the mastery against us, and they went out to us into the field; and with great fierceness we pursued them unto the gate of the city.
2SA 11:24 And [[the]] archers sent darts to thy servants from the wall above, and some of the king’s servants be dead; and also thy servant, Uriah the Hittite, is dead.
2SA 11:25 And David said to the messenger, Thou shalt say these things to Joab, This thing break not thee; for the hap of battle is diverse, and sword wasteth now this man, [[and]] now that man; comfort thy fighters against the city, that thou destroy it, and stir or excite thou them.
2SA 11:26 And the wife of Uriah heard, that Uriah her husband was dead, and she bewailed him.
2SA 11:27 And when the mourning was passed, David sent, and brought her into his house; and she was made wife to him, and she childed a son to him. And this word or thing that David had done displeased before the Lord.
2SA 12:1 Therefore the Lord sent Nathan to David; and when he had come to David, he said to him, Answer thou a doom to me; two men were in one city; one man was rich, and the tother was poor.
2SA 12:2 The rich man had full many sheep, and oxen;
2SA 12:3 and the poor man had utterly nothing, except one little sheep, which he had bought, and nourished, and which had waxed at or with him, and with his sons, and ate together of his bread, and drank of his cup, and slept in his bosom; and it was as a daughter to him.
2SA 12:4 But when a pilgrim came to this rich man, he spared to take of his own sheep and oxen, that he should make a feast to that pilgrim, that came to him; and he took the sheep of the poor man, and prepared meats to the man that came to him.
2SA 12:5 Certainly David was full wroth with indignation against that man, and he said to Nathan, The Lord liveth, for the man that did this thing is the son of death, that is, is worthy of death, for the hideousness of the deed;
2SA 12:6 he shall yield the sheep into four-fold, for he did this word, and spared not.
2SA 12:7 And Nathan said to David, Thou art that man, that hast done this thing. The Lord God of Israel saith these things, I anointed thee into king on Israel, and I delivered thee from the hand of Saul,
2SA 12:8 and I gave to thee the house of thy lord, and the wives of thy lord in thy bosom, and I gave to thee the house of Israel, and of Judah; and if these things be little, I shall add to thee much greater things.
2SA 12:9 Why therefore hast thou despised the word of the Lord, that thou didest evils in my sight? Thou hast killed by sword Uriah the Hittite, and thou hast taken his wife into wife to thee, and thou hast slain him with the sword of the sons of Ammon.
2SA 12:10 Wherefore a sword shall not go away from thine house till into with-out end; for thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite, that she should be thy wife.
2SA 12:11 Therefore the Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall raise upon thee the evil of thine house, and I shall take thy wives in thine eyes or thy sight, and I shall give them to thy neigh-bour, and he shall sleep with thy wives in the eyes of this sun.
2SA 12:12 For thou hast done thy sin privily; forsooth I shall do this word in the sight of all Israel, and in the sight of this sun.
2SA 12:13 And David said to Nathan, I have sinned to the Lord. And Nathan said to David, Also the Lord hath turned away thy sin; thou shalt not die.
2SA 12:14 Nevertheless for thou hast made [[the]] enemies to blaspheme the name of the Lord, for this word the child that is born to thee shall die by death.
2SA 12:15 And Nathan turned again into his house. And the Lord smote the little child, whom the wife of Uriah childed to David, and he despaired.
2SA 12:16 And David prayed to the Lord for the little child; and David fasted by fasting, and entered asides half, and lay on the earth.
2SA 12:17 And the elder men of his house came, and constrained him, that he should rise up from the earth; and he would not, neither he ate meat with them.
2SA 12:18 And it befelled in the seventh day, that the young child died; and the servants of David dreaded to tell to him, that the little child was dead; for they said, Lo! while the little child lived yet, we spake to him, and he heard not our voice; how much more, if we say the child is dead, he shall torment himself?
2SA 12:19 Therefore when David had heard his servants speaking privily, either muttering, he understood that the young child was dead; and he said to his servants, Whether the child is dead? Which answered to him, He is dead.
2SA 12:20 Therefore David rose up from the earth, and was washed, and anointed; and when he had changed his clothes, he entered into the house of the Lord, and worshipped, and came into his house; and he asked, that they should set bread to him, and he ate.
2SA 12:21 And his servants said to him, What is the word that thou hast done? Thou hast fasted, and wept for the young child, while he lived yet; but when the child was dead, thou risedest or hast risen up, and atest bread?
2SA 12:22 And David said, I fasted and wept for the young child, when he lived yet; for I said, Who knoweth, if per-adventure the Lord give him to me, and the young child live?
2SA 12:23 But now for he is dead, why fast I? whether I shall be able to again-call him more? I shall go more to him, but he shall not turn again to me.
2SA 12:24 And David comforted Bathsheba, his wife; and he entered [[in]] to her, and slept with her. And she engendered a son, and David called his name Solomon; and the Lord loved him.
2SA 12:25 And he sent him in the hand of Nathan, the prophet; and he called his name Amiable to the Lord, for the Lord loved him.
2SA 12:26 Then Joab fought against Rabbah, of the sons of Ammon, and he fought against the king’s city.
2SA 12:27 And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought against Rabbah, and the city of waters shall be taken.
2SA 12:28 Now therefore gather thou the tother part of the people, and besiege thou the city, and take thou it, lest when the city is wasted of me, the victory be areckoned to my name.
2SA 12:29 Therefore David gathered together all the people, and he went forth against Rabbah; and when he had fought against that city, he took it.
2SA 12:30 And he took the diadem of the king of them from his head, by weight [[of]] a talent of gold, and having precious pearls; and it was put on the head of David; but also David bare away full much prey of the city.
2SA 12:31 And he led forth the people thereof, and sawed them, and did about them iron instruments of torment, and parted with knives, and led over by the likeness of tilestones; so he did to all the cities of the sons of Ammon. And David turned again, and all his host, into Jerusalem.
2SA 13:1 And it was done after these things, that Amnon, the son of David, loved the fairest sister, Tamar by name, of Absalom, the son of David.
2SA 13:2 And Amnon perished greatly for her, so that he was sick for her love. For since she was a virgin, it seemed hard to him, that he should do any-thing unhonestly with her.
2SA 13:3 But there was a friend to Amnon, Jonadab by name, the son of Shimeah, the brother of David; and Jonadab was a full prudent [[or a full sly]] man.
2SA 13:4 Which said to Amnon, Son of the king, why art thou made feeble so by leanness, by all days? why showest thou not to me? And Amnon said to him, I love Tamar, the sister of my brother Absalom.
2SA 13:5 And Jonadab answered to him, Lie thou on thy bed, and feign thou sickness; and when thy father cometh, that he visit thee, say thou to him, I pray, come Tamar, my sister, that she give meat to me, and make a stew, that I eat it of her hand.
2SA 13:6 Therefore Amnon lay down, and feigned to be sick. And when the king had come to visit him, Amnon said to the king, I beseech, come Tamar, my sister, that she make two suppings before my eyes, and that I take of her hand the meat made ready.
2SA 13:7 Therefore David sent to the house of Tamar, and said, Come thou into the house of Amnon, thy brother, and make thou a stew to him.
2SA 13:8 And Tamar came into the house of Amnon, her brother. And he lay down; and she took meal, and mixed together, and made moist before his eyes, and seethed [[the]] suppings;
2SA 13:9 and she took that, that she had sodden, and poured it out, and set it before him, and he would not eat. And Amnon said, Put ye out all men from me. And when they had put out all men,
2SA 13:10 Amnon said to Tamar, Bear the meat into the bed-closet, that I eat of thine hand. Therefore Tamar took the suppings which she had made, and brought in to Amnon, her brother, in the bed-closet.
2SA 13:11 And when she had proffered the meat to him, he took her, and said, Come thou, my sister, lie thou with me.
2SA 13:12 And she answered to him, My brother, do not thou, do not thou oppress me, for this is not leaveful in Israel; do not thou do this folly.
2SA 13:13 For I shall not be able to bear my shame, and thou shalt be as one of the unwise men in Israel; but rather speak thou to the king, and he shall not deny me to thee.
2SA 13:14 Soothly he would not assent to her prayers; but he was stronger in mights, and oppressed her, and lay with her.
2SA 13:15 And then, with full great hatred Amnon hated her, so that the hatred was greater, by which he hated her, than the love by which he loved her before. And Amnon said to her, Rise thou, and go.
2SA 13:16 And she answered to him, This evil is more which thou doest now against me, and puttest me out, than that, that thou didest before. And he would not hear her;
2SA 13:17 but when the child was called, that ministered to him, he said, Put thou out this woman from me, and close thou the door after her.
2SA 13:18 And she was clothed with a coat down to the heel; for the king’s daughters who were virgins used such clothes. Then the servant of Amnon put her out, and closed the door after her.
2SA 13:19 And she sprinkled ashes onto her head, and when her long coat was rent, and her hands put on her head, she went entering [[in]] and crying.
2SA 13:20 And Absalom, her brother, said to her, Whether Amnon, thy brother, hath lain with thee? But now, sister, be still; he is thy brother, and torment thou not thine heart for this thing. Therefore Tamar dwelled mourning in the house of Absalom, her brother.
2SA 13:21 Forsooth when king David had heard these words, he was full sorry, and he would not make sore the spirit of Amnon, his son; for he loved Amnon, for he was his first begotten son.
2SA 13:22 And Absalom spake not to Amnon, neither evil nor good; for Absalom hated Amnon, for he had defouled Tamar, his sister.
2SA 13:23 And it was done after the time of two years, that the sheep of Absalom were shorn in Baalhazor, which is beside Ephraim. And Absalom called all the sons of the king.
2SA 13:24 And he came to the king, and said to him, Lo! the sheep of thy servant be shorn; I pray, come the king with his servants to his servant.
2SA 13:25 And the king said to Absalom, Do not thou, my son, do not thou pray, that all we come, and charge thee. And when he constrained David, and he would not go, he blessed Absalom.
2SA 13:26 And Absalom said to David, If thou wilt not come, I beseech thee, come namely Amnon, my brother, with us. And the king said to him, It is no need, that he go with thee.
2SA 13:27 Therefore Absalom constrained him; and he delivered with him Amnon, and all the sons of the king.
2SA 13:28 And Absalom had made a feast as the feast of a king. And Absalom [[had]] commanded to his children, and said, Espy ye, when Amnon is drunken of wine, and when I say to you, Smite ye, and slayeth him. Do not ye dread, for I am that command to you; be ye strengthened, and be ye strong men.
2SA 13:29 Therefore the children of Absalom did against Amnon, as Absalom had commanded to them; and all the sons of the king rose up, and ascended [[or went]] each upon his mule, and fled.
2SA 13:30 And when they went yet in the way, the fame came thereof to the king, and it was said, Absalom hath slain all the sons of the king, and namely not one is left of them.
2SA 13:31 Therefore the king rose up, and rent his clothes, and felled down on the earth; and all his servants that stood nigh to him, rent their clothes.
2SA 13:32 But Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, brother of David, answered and said, My lord the king, guess thou not, that all the young men, and sons of the king, be slain; Amnon alone is dead, for he was set in hatred to Absalom, from the day in which he oppressed Tamar, his sister.
2SA 13:33 Now therefore, my lord the king, set not this word on his heart, and say, All the sons of the king be slain; for Amnon alone is dead.
2SA 13:34 Forsooth Absalom fled. And a child, espyer, raised [[up]] his eyes, and beheld, and lo! much people came by a way out of the common way, by the side of the hill.
2SA 13:35 And Jonadab said to the king, Lo! the sons of the king come; after the word of thy servant, so it is done.
2SA 13:36 And when he had ceased to speak, also the sons of the king appeared; and they entered, and raised up their voice, and wept; but also the king and all his servants wept with full great weeping.
2SA 13:37 Forsooth Absalom fled, and went to Talmai, the son of Ammihud, the king of Geshur. Therefore David bewailed his son Amnon in many days.
2SA 13:38 Forsooth Absalom, when he had fled, and had come into Geshur, was there three years.
2SA 13:39 And [[king]] David ceased to pursue Absalom, for he was comforted upon the death of Amnon.
2SA 14:1 Forsooth Joab, the son of Zeruiah, understood, that the heart of the king was turned to Absalom;
2SA 14:2 and he sent to Tekoah, and took from thence a wise woman, and he said to her, Feign thee to mourn, and be thou clothed with a cloth of dole, and be thou not anointed with oil, that thou be as a woman by mourning now in full much time a dead man.
2SA 14:3 And thou shalt enter to the king, and thou shalt speak to him such manner words. And Joab put the words in her mouth.
2SA 14:4 Therefore when the woman of Tekoah had entered to the king, she felled before him on the earth, and worshipped, and said, O! king, keep thou me.
2SA 14:5 And the king said to her, What hast thou of cause? And she answered, Alas! I am a woman widow, for mine husband is dead;
2SA 14:6 and twain [[or two]] sons were of thine handmaid, which debated against themselves in the field, and none was that might forbid them, and the one smote the tother, and killed him.
2SA 14:7 And lo! all the kindred riseth against thine handmaid, and saith, Give thou him to us that killed his brother, that we slay him, for the life of his brother whom he killed, and that we do away the heir; and they seek to quench my spark that is left, that the name dwell not to mine husband, and that remnants be not to him on earth.
2SA 14:8 And the king said to the woman, Go into thine house, and I shall command for thee.
2SA 14:9 And the woman of Tekoah said to the king, My lord the king, this wicked-ness be on me, and on the house of my father; forsooth the king and his throne be innocent or guiltless.
2SA 14:10 And the king said, Bring thou him to me, that against-saith thee, and he shall no more add to, that he touch thee.
2SA 14:11 And she said, The king have mind on his Lord God, and the next kins-men of blood to take vengeance be not multiplied, and they shall not slay my son. And the king said, The Lord liveth, for none of the hairs of thy son shall fall upon the earth.
2SA 14:12 Therefore the woman said, Thine handmaid speak a word to my lord the king. And the king said, Speak thou.
2SA 14:13 And the woman said, Why hast thou thought such a thing against the people of God? and the king spake this word, that he do sin, and bring not again his son who is cast out?
2SA 14:14 All we die, and as waters that shall not turn again, we slide into the earth; and God will not that a soul perish, but he withdraweth, and thinketh, lest he perish utterly, which is cast away.
2SA 14:15 Now therefore come thou, that I speak to my lord the king this word, while the people is present; and thine handmaid said, I shall speak to the king, if in any manner the king do the word of his handmaid.
2SA 14:16 And the king heard the words, that he should deliver his handmaid from the hands of all men, that would do away me, and my son together, from the heritage of the Lord.
2SA 14:17 Therefore thine handmaid say, that the word of my lord the king be made as sacrifice, that is, that the sentence given of him be pleasant to God, as sacrifice pleaseth God; for as an angel of the Lord, so is my lord the king, that he be not moved by blessing neither by cursing. Wherefore and thy Lord God is with thee.
2SA 14:18 And the king answered, and said to the woman, Hide thou not from me the word which I ask thee. And the woman said to him, Speak thou, my lord the king.
2SA 14:19 And the king said, Whether the hand of Joab is with thee in all these things? The woman answered, and said, By the health of thy soul, my lord the king, neither to the left side neither to the right side is anything of all these things, which my lord the king hath spoken. For thy servant Joab himself commanded to me, and he putted [[or put]] all these words into the mouth of thine handmaid,
2SA 14:20 that I should turn the figure of this word; for thy servant Joab commanded this thing. Forsooth thou, my lord the king, art wise, as an angel of God that hath wisdom, that thou understand all things on earth.
2SA 14:21 And the king said to Joab, Lo! I am pleased, and I have done thy word; therefore go thou, and again-call thou the child Absalom.
2SA 14:22 And Joab felled upon his face to the earth, and he worshipped, and blessed the king; and Joab said, Thy servant hath understood today, that I have found grace in thine eyes, my lord king, for thou hast done the word of thy servant.
2SA 14:23 Therefore Joab rose up, and went into Geshur, and brought Absalom into Jerusalem.
2SA 14:24 And the king said, Turn he again into his house, and see not he my face. Therefore Absalom turned again into his house, and saw not the face of the king.
2SA 14:25 Soothly no man in all Israel was so fair as Absalom, and full comely; from the step of the foot unto the top, there was no wem in him;
2SA 14:26 and inasmuch as he clipped more his hairs, by so much the more they waxed; but he was clipped once in the year, for his hair grieved him. And when he clipped the hairs, he weighed the hairs of his head by two hundred shekels by common weight.
2SA 14:27 And three sons, and a daughter, Tamar by name, of seemly shape, or excellent form, were born to Absalom.
2SA 14:28 And Absalom dwelled in Jerusalem two years, and he saw not the face of the king.
2SA 14:29 Therefore he sent to Joab, that he should send him to the king; and Joab would not come to him. And when he had sent the second time, and Joab would not come,
2SA 14:30 Absalom said to his servants, Ye know the field of Joab beside my field having ripe barley; therefore go ye, and burn ye it [[up]] with fire. Therefore the servants of Absalom burnt the corn with fire.
2SA 14:31 And Joab rose up, and came to Absalom into his house, and said, Why have thy servants burnt [[up]] my corn with fire?
2SA 14:32 And Absalom answered to Joab, I sent to thee, and besought that thou shouldest come to me, and that I should send thee to the king, that thou shouldest say to him, Why came I from Geshur? It was better to me to have been there; therefore I beseech, that I see the face of the king, that if he is mindful of my wickedness, slay he me.
2SA 14:33 Joab entered to the king, and told to him. And Absalom was called, and he entered to the king, and he worshipped on the face of [[the]] earth before him, and the king kissed Absalom.
2SA 15:1 Therefore after these things, Absalom made a chariot to him, and had knights and fifty men, that should go before him.
2SA 15:2 And Absalom rose early, and stood beside the entering of the gate in the way; and Absalom called to him each man, that had a cause [[or a need]] that he should come to the doom of the king, and Absalom said, Of what city art thou? Which answered, and said, Of one lineage of Israel I am, thy servant.
2SA 15:3 And Absalom answered to him, Thy words seem to me good and just, but none is ordained of the king to hear thee.
2SA 15:4 And Absalom said, Who shall ordain me judge on the land, that all men that have a cause [[or need]] come to me, and I deem justly [[or right-wisely]]?
2SA 15:5 But when a man came to Absalom to greet him, he held forth his hand, and took, and kissed that man;
2SA 15:6 and Absalom did this to all Israel, that came to doom to be heard of the king; and Absalom stole the hearts of [[the]] men of Israel.
2SA 15:7 But after four years, Absalom said to king David, I shall go, and shall yield my vows, which I vowed to the Lord in Hebron;
2SA 15:8 for thy servant vowing vowed, when he was in Geshur of Syria, and said, If the Lord bringeth again me [[or me again]] into Jerusalem, I shall make sacrifice to the Lord.
2SA 15:9 And the king said to him, Go thou in peace. And Absalom rose up, and went into Hebron.
2SA 15:10 Forsooth Absalom sent spyers into all the lineage[[s]] of Israel, and said, Anon as ye hear the sound of [[the]] clarion, say ye, Absalom shall reign in Hebron.
2SA 15:11 And two hundred men called out of Jerusalem went forth with Absalom, and went with simple heart, and utterly they knew not the cause.
2SA 15:12 Also Absalom called for Ahithophel of Giloh, the counsellor of David, from his city Giloh. And when he offered sacrifices, a strong swearing together was made, and the people running together was increased with Absalom.
2SA 15:13 Therefore a messenger came to David, and said, With all [[the]] heart all Israel followeth Absalom,
2SA 15:14 And David said to his servants that were with him in Jerusalem, Rise ye up, and flee we; for none escaping shall be to us from the face of Absalom; therefore haste ye to go out, lest he come, and occupy us, and fulfill upon us his falling, and smite the city with sharpness of [[the]] sword.
2SA 15:15 And the servants of the king said to him, We thy servants shall perform gladly all things, whatever our lord the king shall command.
2SA 15:16 Then the king went out, and all his house, upon their feet; and the king left ten women concubines, that is, secondary wives, to keep the house.
2SA 15:17 And the king went out, and all Israel, upon their feet, and the king stood far from the house.
2SA 15:18 And all his servants went beside him, and the legions of Cherethites and of Pelethites, and all the strong fighting men of Gath, six hundred men, that pursued [[or followed]] him from Gath, went on foot before the king.
2SA 15:19 And the king said to Ittai of Gath, Why comest thou with us? Turn thou again, and dwell with the new king, for thou art a pilgrim, and wentest out from thy place.
2SA 15:20 Thou camest yesterday, and today thou art compelled to go out with us. Soothly I shall go, whither I shall go; turn again, and lead again thy brethren with thee, and the Lord do mercy and truth with thee, for thou hast showed to me grace and faith.
2SA 15:21 And Ittai answered to the king, and said, The Lord liveth, and my lord the king liveth, for in whatever place thou shalt be, my lord the king, either in death either in life, there thy servant shall be.
2SA 15:22 And David said to Ittai, Come thou, and pass forth. And Ittai of Gath passed forth, and the king, and all men that were with him, and the tother multitude.
2SA 15:23 And all men wept with great voice, and all the people passed forth; and the king went over the strand [[or stream]] of Kidron, and all the people went against the way of the olive trees, that beholdeth to the desert.
2SA 15:24 Forsooth and Zadok the priest came, and all the deacons [[or Levites]] with him, and they bare the ark of [[the]] bond of peace of God, and they setted [[or set]] down the ark of God; and Abiathar went up, till all the people was passed forth that went out of the city.
2SA 15:25 And the king said to Zadok, Bear again the ark of God into the city; if I shall find grace in the eyes of the Lord, he shall lead me again, and he shall show to me that ark, and his tabernacle.
2SA 15:26 Soothly if the Lord saith, Thou pleasest not me; I am ready, do he that, that is good before himself.
2SA 15:27 And the king said to Zadok, the priest, O! thou seer, that is, prophet, turn again into the city, with peace; and Ahimaaz, thy son, and Jonathan, the son of Abiathar, your two sons, be with you.
2SA 15:28 Lo! I shall be hid in [[the]] field places of the desert, till word come from you, and show to me.
2SA 15:29 Therefore Zadok and Abiathar bare again the ark of God into Jerusalem, and they dwelled there.
2SA 15:30 Forsooth David went up upon the hill of olive trees, going up and weeping, with his head covered, and with bare feet passing forth; but also all the people that was with him, went up with their heads covered, and wept.
2SA 15:31 And it was told to David, that Ahithophel was in the swearing together with Absalom; and David said, Lord, I beseech, make thou fond [[or folly]] the counsel of Ahithophel.
2SA 15:32 And when David went up into [[the]] highness of the hill, in which he should worship the Lord, lo! Hushai of Archi, with his cloth rent, and with his head full of earth, came to him.
2SA 15:33 And David said to him, If thou comest with me, thou shalt be to me a charge;
2SA 15:34 soothly if thou turnest again to the city, and sayest to Absalom, I am thy servant, O king, suffer thou me to live; as I was the servant of thy father, so I shall be thy servant; thou shalt destroy the counsel of Ahithophel.
2SA 15:35 And thou hast with thee Zadok and Abiathar, the priests; and what-ever word thou shalt hear in the house of the king, thou shalt show it to the priests, Zadok and Abiathar.
2SA 15:36 And their two sons be with them, Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok, and Jonathan, the son of Abiathar; and ye shall send by them to me each word that ye shall hear.
2SA 15:37 Therefore when Hushai, friend of David, came into the city, also Absalom entered into Jerusalem.
2SA 16:1 And when David had passed a little the top of the hill, Ziba, the child of Mephibosheth, appeared into his coming, with twain [[or two]] asses, that were charged with two hundred loaves, and with an hundred bundles of dried grapes, and with an hundred gobbets of pressed figs, and with two vessels of wine.
2SA 16:2 And the king said to Ziba, What will or mean these things to themselves? And Ziba answered, My lord the king, the asses be to the menials of the king, that they sit on them; and the loaves and the pressed figs be to thy children to eat; forsooth the wine is, that if any man fail in desert, he may drink.
2SA 16:3 And the king said, Where is the son of thy lord? And Ziba answered to the king, He dwelled [[still]] in Jerusalem, and said, Today the Lord of the house of Israel shall restore to me the realm of my father.
2SA 16:4 And the king said to Ziba, All things that were of Mephibosheth be thine. And Ziba said, I pray, find I grace before thee, my lord the king.
2SA 16:5 Therefore king David came to Bahurim, and lo! a man of the family of the house of Saul, Shimei by name, [[the]] son of Gera, went out from thence; he went forth going out, and cursed.
2SA 16:6 And he sent stones against David, and against all the servants of king David; and all the people, and all the fighting men went at the right side and at the left side of the king.
2SA 16:7 And Shimei spake thus, when he cursed the king, Go out, go out, thou man of bloods, that is, the shedder out of much guiltless blood, and man of Belial!
2SA 16:8 The Lord hath yielded to thee all the blood of the house of Saul, for thou hast ravished the realm from him; and the Lord hath given the realm into the hand of Absalom, thy son; and lo! thine evils oppress thee, for thou art a man of bloods.
2SA 16:9 And Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, said to the king, Why curseth this dog, that shall die, my lord the king? I shall go, and I shall gird off his head.
2SA 16:10 And the king said, Ye sons of Zeruiah, what is it to me and to you? Suffer ye him, that he curse; forsooth the Lord hath commanded to him, that he should curse David; and who is he that dare say, Why did he so?
2SA 16:11 And the king said to Abishai, and to all his servants, Lo! my son, that went out of my womb, seeketh my life; how much more now this son of Benjamin? Suffer ye him, that he curse me by [[the]] commandment of the Lord;
2SA 16:12 if in hap the Lord behold my tormenting, and yield good to me for this day’s cursing.
2SA 16:13 Therefore David went forth, and his fellows, by the way with him; but Shimei went aside by the slade of the hill against David; and cursed David, and threw stones against him, and sprinkled earth.
2SA 16:14 And so king David came, and all the people weary with him, and they were refreshed there.
2SA 16:15 And Absalom, and all the people of Israel entered into Jerusalem, but also Ahithophel with him.
2SA 16:16 And when Hushai of Archi, the friend of David, had come to Absalom, he said to him, Hail, king! hail, king!
2SA 16:17 To whom Absalom said, This is thy grace to thy friend; why wentest thou not with thy friend?
2SA 16:18 And Hushai answered to Absalom, Nay, for I shall be the servant of him, whom the Lord hath chosen, and all this people, and all Israel; and I shall dwell with him.
2SA 16:19 But that I say also this, to whom shall I serve? whether not to the son of the king? as I obeyed to thy father, so I shall obey to thee.
2SA 16:20 And Absalom said to Ahithophel, Take ye counsel, what we owe to do.
2SA 16:21 And Ahithophel said to Absalom, Enter thou [[in]] to the concubines of thy father, which he left to keep the house; that when all Israel heareth, that thou hast defouled thy father’s bed, the hands of them be strengthened with thee.
2SA 16:22 Therefore they stretched out for Absalom a tabernacle in the solar, and he entered [[in]] to the concubines of his father before all Israel.
2SA 16:23 And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he gave in those days, was as if a man had counselled with God; so was all the counsel of Ahithophel, both when he was with David, and when he was with Absalom.
2SA 17:1 Then Ahithophel said to Absalom, I shall choose to me twelve thousand of men, and I shall rise up, and pursue David in this night.
2SA 17:2 And I shall fall on him, for he is weary, and with unbound hands I shall smite him. And when all the people fleeth that is with him, I shall smite the king left alone.
2SA 17:3 And I shall lead again all the people, as one man is wont to be turned again; for thou seekest one man, and all the people shall be in peace.
2SA 17:4 And the words of Ahithophel pleased Absalom, and all the greater men in birth of Israel.
2SA 17:5 And Absalom said, Call ye also Hushai of Archi, and hear we what also he saith.
2SA 17:6 And when Hushai had come to Absalom, Absalom said to him, Ahith-ophel hath spoken such a word; owe we to do thereafter, either nay? what counsel givest thou?
2SA 17:7 And Hushai said to Absalom, This is not good counsel, that Ahith-ophel hath given in this time.
2SA 17:8 And again Hushai said, Thou knowest, that thy father, and the men that be with him, be most strong, and in bitter soul, as if a she bear is fierce in the forest, when her whelps be ravished from her; but also thy father is a man warrior, and he shall not dwell with the people.
2SA 17:9 In hap now he is hid, either lurketh, in ditches, either in one place, in which he will hide him; and when any man falleth in the beginning, whoever shall hear it, he shall hear, and shall say, Vengeance is done in the people that pursued Absalom.
2SA 17:10 And each full strong man, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, shall be discomforted for dread; for all the people of Israel knoweth, that thy father is strong, and that all the men be strong, that be with him.
2SA 17:11 But this seemeth to me to be rightful [[or right]] counsel; all Israel be gathered to thee, from Dan till to Beersheba, unnumberable as the sand of the sea; and thou shalt be in the midst of them.
2SA 17:12 And we shall fall upon him, in whatever place he is found, and we shall cover him, as dew is wont to fall on the earth; and we shall not leave of the men that be with him, soothly not one.
2SA 17:13 That if he entereth into any city, all Israel shall compass that city with ropes, and we shall draw it into the strand [[or stream]], yea that nothing be found, soothly not a little stone thereof.
2SA 17:14 And Absalom said, and all the men of Israel, The counsel of Hushai of Archi is better than the counsel of Ahithophel; and the profitable counsel of Ahithophel was destroyed by God’s will, that the Lord should bring in evil on Absalom.
2SA 17:15 And Hushai said to Zadok and to Abiathar, the priests, Ahithophel gave counsel to Absalom, and to the elder men of Israel in this and this manner, and I gave such and such counsel.
2SA 17:16 Now therefore send ye soon, and tell ye to David, and say ye, Dwell thou not this night in [[the]] field places of the desert, but pass thou [[over]] without delay; lest peradventure the king be swallowed up, and all the people that is with him.
2SA 17:17 And Jonathan and Ahimaaz stood beside the well of Rogel; and an handmaid went, and told to them, and they went forth to tell the message to king David; for they might not be seen, neither enter into the city.
2SA 17:18 And a child saw them, and he showed it to Absalom; and they entered with swift going into the house of a man in Bahurim, that had a pit or well in his place, and they went down into that pit.
2SA 17:19 And a woman took, and spread abroad a covering over the mouth of the pit, as if drying barley with the peel taken away, and so the thing was hid.
2SA 17:20 And when the servants of Absalom had come into the house, they said to the woman, Where is Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman answered to them, They passed the river of waters, that is, Jordan. And when they that sought them had not found them, they turned again into Jerusalem.
2SA 17:21 And when they had gone forth, they went up from the pit; and they went, and told to king David, and said, Rise ye up, and passeth soon [[over]] the flood, for Ahithophel hath given such counsel against you.
2SA 17:22 Therefore David rose up, and all the people that was with him, and they passed over Jordan, till it was clear day, before that the word was published; and soothly not one was left, that passed not over the flood.
2SA 17:23 And Ahithophel saw, that his counsel was not done, and he saddled his ass, and rose up, and went into his house, and into his city; and when his house was disposed, he perished by hanging himself, and he was buried in the sepulchre of his father.
2SA 17:24 And David came into the castles, and Absalom passed [[over]] Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.
2SA 17:25 And Absalom ordained Amasa for Joab upon his host; and Amasa was the son of a man that was called Ithra of Jezreel, the which entered to Abigail, the daughter of Nahash, and the sister of Zeruiah, that was the mother of Joab.
2SA 17:26 And Israel setted tents with Absalom in the land of Gilead.
2SA 17:27 And when David had come into the castles or Mahanaim, Shobi, the son of Nahash of Rabbah, of the sons of Ammon, and Machir, the son of Ammiel, of Lodebar, and Barzillai, of Gilead, of Rogelim,
2SA 17:28 brought to him beddings, and tapets, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and barley, and meal, and flour, and beans, and lentils or vetches, and fried chickpeas,
2SA 17:29 and honey, and butter, and sheep, and fat calves. And they gave those to David, and to the people that were with him, to eat; for they supposed the people to be made faint for hunger and thirst in desert.
2SA 18:1 Therefore David, when he had beheld his people, ordained chieftains of thousands, and of hundreds, upon them.
2SA 18:2 And he gave the third part of the people under the hand of Joab; and the third part under the hand of Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, the brother of Joab; and the third part under the hand of Ittai, that was of Gath. And the king said to the people, Also I shall go out with you.
2SA 18:3 And the people answered, Thou shalt not go out; for whether we flee, it shall not pertain to them by great work of us; whether half the part fall down of us, they shall not reckon enough, for thou art reckoned for ten thousand; therefore it is better, that thou be to us in the city in strong succour.
2SA 18:4 And the king said to them, I shall do that, that seemeth rightful [[or right]] to you. Therefore the king stood beside the gate, and the people went out by their companies, by hundreds, and by thousands.
2SA 18:5 And the king commanded to Joab, and to Abishai, and to Ittai, and said, Keep ye to me the child Absalom. And all the people heard the king commanding to all the princes for Absalom.
2SA 18:6 Therefore the people went out into the field against Israel; and the battle was made in the forest of Ephraim.
2SA 18:7 And the people of Israel was slain there of the host of David, and a great slaughter of twenty thousand was made in that day.
2SA 18:8 And the battle was scattered there upon the face of all the land, and many more were of the people which the forest wasted, than they which the sword devoured in that day.
2SA 18:9 Soothly it befelled, that Absalom, sitting on a mule, came against the servants of David; and when the mule had entered under a thick oak, and great, the head of Absalom cleaved to the oak; and when he was hanged betwixt heaven and earth, the mule, on which he sat, passed forth.
2SA 18:10 And some man saw this, and told it to Joab, and said, I saw Absalom hanged on an oak.
2SA 18:11 And Joab said to the man that told to him, If thou saw him, why piercedest thou not him through to the earth, and I should have given to thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle?
2SA 18:12 And he said to Joab, Though thou paidest in mine hands a thousand plates of silver, I would not send [[or put]] mine hand into the son of the king; for while we heard, the king commanded to thee, and to Abishai, and to Ittai, and said, Keep ye to me the child Absalom.
2SA 18:13 But and though I had done fool hardily against my life, this might not be hid from the king, and thou wouldest stand on the contrary side.
2SA 18:14 And Joab said, Not as thou wilt, but I shall assail him before thee. Therefore Joab took three spears in his hand, and fixed those [[or them]] in the heart of Absalom. And when he sprawled, yet cleaving in the oak,
2SA 18:15 ten young squires of Joab ran, and smote, and killed him.
2SA 18:16 And Joab trumped with a clarion, and held with him the people, lest it pursued Israel fleeing, and he would spare the multitude.
2SA 18:17 And they took Absalom, and casted forth him into a great ditch in the forest, and bare together a full great heap of stones on him; and all Israel fled into their tabernacles.
2SA 18:18 Forsooth Absalom, while he lived yet, had raised to him a memorial, which is in the valley of the king; for he said, I have no son, and this shall be the mind of my name; and he called the memorial by his name, and it is called The Hand, that is, the Work, of Absalom, till to this day.
2SA 18:19 And Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok, said, I shall run, and I shall tell to the king, that the Lord hath made doom to him of the hand of his enemies.
2SA 18:20 To whom Joab said, Thou shalt not be a messenger in this day, but thou shalt tell in another day; I will or desire not that thou tell this today, for the son of the king is dead.
2SA 18:21 And Joab said to Cushi, Go thou, and tell to the king those things that thou hast seen. Cushi worshipped Joab, and ran forth.
2SA 18:22 And again Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok, said to Joab, What hindereth, if also I run after Cushi? And Joab said to him, What wilt thou run, my son? Come thou hither, thou shalt not be a bearer of good message.
2SA 18:23 The which answered, But what if I shall run? And Joab said to him, Run thou. Therefore Ahimaaz ran by the way of shortness, and speed, and passed Cushi.
2SA 18:24 And David sat betwixt two gates; soothly the espyer, that was in the highness of the gate on the wall, raised up his eyes, and he saw a man alone running;
2SA 18:25 and the espyer cried, and showed to the king. And the king said to him, If he is alone, good message is in his mouth. But while he hasted, and nighed near,
2SA 18:26 the espyer saw another man run-ning; and the espyer cried on high, and said, Another man running alone appeareth to me. And the king said to him, And this man is a good mes-senger.
2SA 18:27 Soothly the espyer said, I behold the running of the former, as the running of Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok. And the king said, He is a good man, and he cometh bringing a good message.
2SA 18:28 And Ahimaaz cried, and said to the king, Hail king! And he worshipped the king lowly before him to the earth, and said, Blessed be thy Lord God, that hath enclosed altogether the men, that raised their hands against my lord the king.
2SA 18:29 And the king said, Whether peace is to the child Absalom? And Ahimaaz said, I saw, that is, I heard, a great noise, when Joab, thy servant, thou king, sent me, thy servant; I know none other thing.
2SA 18:30 To whom the king said, Pass thou, and stand here. And when he had passed, and stood,
2SA 18:31 Cushi appeared; and he came and said, My lord the king, I bring good message; for the Lord hath deemed today for thee of the hand of all men that rised against thee.
2SA 18:32 And the king said to Cushi, Whether peace is to the child Absalom? To whom Cushi answered, and said, The enemies of my lord the king, and all men that rise against him into evil, be made as the child.
2SA 18:33 Therefore the king was sorry, and went up into the solar of the gate, and he wept, and spake thus going, My son, Absalom! Absalom, my son! who giveth to me, that I die for thee? Absalom, my son! my son, Absalom!
2SA 19:1 Forsooth it was told to Joab, that the king wept, and bewailed his son;
2SA 19:2 and the victory in that day was turned into mourning to all the people; for the people heard, that it was said in that day, The king maketh sorrow on his son.
2SA 19:3 And the people eschewed to enter into the city in that day, as the people turned and fleeing from [[the]] battle is wont to bow away.
2SA 19:4 And the king covered his head, and cried with great voice, My son, Absalom! Absalom, my son!
2SA 19:5 Therefore Joab entered to the king into the house, and said, Thou hast shamed today the cheers of all thy servants, that have made safe thy life, and the life of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the life of thy wives, and the life of thy secondary wives.
2SA 19:6 Thou lovest them that hate thee, and thou hatest them that love thee; and thou hast showed today that thou reckest not of thy dukes and of thy servants; and verily I have known now, that if Absalom lived, and all we had been dead, then it should please thee.
2SA 19:7 Now therefore rise up, and go thou forth, and speak thou, and make satisfaction to thy servants; for I swear to thee by the Lord, that if thou shalt not go forth, soothly not one man shall dwell with thee in this night; and this shall be worse to thee, than all the evils that came [[up]] on thee from thy young waxing age till into this present time.
2SA 19:8 Therefore the king rose up, and sat in the gate; and it was told to all the people, that the king sat in the gate, and all the multitude came before the king. Forsooth Israel fled into their tabernacles.
2SA 19:9 And all the people strived in all the lineages of Israel, and said, The king delivered us from the hand of all our enemies, and he saved us from the hand of Philistines; and now he hath fled from the land for Absalom.
2SA 19:10 Certainly Absalom, whom we anointed upon us, is dead in battle; how long be ye still, and bring not again the king? And the counsel of all Israel came to the king.
2SA 19:11 And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar, the priests, and said, Speak ye to the greater men in birth of Judah, and say ye, Why came ye the last to bring again the king into his house? Soothly the word of all Israel came to the king, that they would bring him again into his house. For the king said, Ye shall say these things to the people,
2SA 19:12 Ye be my brethren, ye be my bone and my flesh; why the last bring ye again the king?
2SA 19:13 And say ye to Amasa, Whether thou art not my bone and my flesh? God do these things to me, and add these things too, if thou shalt not be master of chivalry, before me in all time after Joab.
2SA 19:14 And David bowed to him the heart of all [[the]] men of Judah as of one man; and they sent to the king, and said, Turn thou again, and all thy servants.
2SA 19:15 And the king turned again, and came till to Jordan; and all Judah came till into Gilgal to meet the king, and to lead him over the Jordan.
2SA 19:16 But Shimei, the son of Gera, the son of Benjamin, of Bahurim, hasted, and came down with the men of Judah into the meeting of king David,
2SA 19:17 with a thousand men of Benjamin; and Ziba, the child of the house of Saul, and fifteen sons of him, and twenty servants were with him; and they brake into the Jordan, before the king,
2SA 19:18 and they passed over the fords, that they should lead over the house of the king, and do by the behest of the king. Soothly Shimei, the son of Gera, kneeled before the king, when he had passed now Jordan,
2SA 19:19 and said to the king, My lord the king, areckon thou not wickedness to me, neither have thou mind of the wrongs of thy servant in the day, in which thou, my lord the king, wentest out of Jerusalem, neither set thou, king, those wrongs in thine heart;
2SA 19:20 for I thy servant acknowledge my sin; and therefore today I came the first of all the house of Joseph, and I came down into the meeting of my lord the king.
2SA 19:21 And Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, answered and said, Whether Shimei, that cursed the christ of the Lord, shall not be slain for these words?
2SA 19:22 And David said, What is it to me and to you, ye sons of Zeruiah? Why be ye made to me today into Satan, that is, adversary? Therefore whether a man shall be slain today in Israel? Whether I know not me made king today on Israel?
2SA 19:23 And the king said to Shimei, Thou shalt not die; and the king swore to him.
2SA 19:24 Also Mephibosheth, the son of Saul, came down with unwashed feet, and with his beard unclipped, into the coming of the king. And Mephibosheth had not washed his clothes, from the day in which the king went out of Jerusalem till to the day of his coming again in peace.
2SA 19:25 And when at Jerusalem he had come to the king, the king said to him, Mephibosheth, why camest thou not with me?
2SA 19:26 And he answered and said, My lord the king, my servant despised me; and I thy servant said to him, that he should saddle the ass to me, and I should ascend, and I should go with the king; for I thy servant am crooked.
2SA 19:27 Moreover and he accused me, thy servant, to thee, my lord the king; but thou, my lord the king, art as the angel of God; do thou that, that is pleasant [[or pleasing]] to thee.
2SA 19:28 For the house of my father was no but guilty to [[the]] death to my lord the king; soothly thou hast set [[or puttest]] me thy servant among the guests of thy board; what therefore have I of just complaint, either what may I more cry to the king?
2SA 19:29 And the king said to him, What speakest thou more? that that I have spoken is steadfast; thou and Ziba part the possessions.
2SA 19:30 And Mephibosheth answered to the king, Yea, take he all things, after that my lord the king turned again peaceably into his house.
2SA 19:31 Also Barzillai of Gilead, a full eld [[or old]] man, came down from Rogelim, and led the king over Jordan, ready also to pursue [[or follow]] him over the flood.
2SA 19:32 And Barzillai of Gilead was full eld [[or old]], that is, of fourscore years; and he gave meats to the king, when the king dwelled in castles; for Barzillai was a full rich man.
2SA 19:33 And so the king said to Barzillai, Come thou with me, that thou rest securely with me in Jerusalem.
2SA 19:34 And Barzillai said to the king, How many be the days of [[the]] years of my life, that I go up with the king into Jerusalem?
2SA 19:35 I am of fourscore years today; whether my wits be quick to deem sweet thing either bitter, either meat and drink may delight thy servant, either may I hear more the voice of singers either of singsters? Why is thy servant to be a charge to my lord the king?
2SA 19:36 I thy servant shall go forth a little from the Jordan with thee, I have no need to this yielding;
2SA 19:37 but I beseech thee, that I thy servant turn again, and die in my city, and be buried beside the sepulchre of my father and of my mother; forsooth my son Chimham is thy servant, my lord the king, go he with thee, and do thou to him that that seemeth good to thee.
2SA 19:38 Therefore the king said to Bar-zillai, Chimham go forth with me; and I shall do to him whatever thing pleaseth thee, and thou shalt get all thing, that thou askest of me.
2SA 19:39 And when all the people and the king had passed [[over]] Jordan, the king abode; and the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; and he turned again into his place.
2SA 19:40 Then the king passed forth into Gilgal, and Chimham with him. And all the people of Judah had led the king over, and the half part only of the people of Israel was present.
2SA 19:41 Therefore all the men of Israel came together to the king, and said to him, Why have our brethren, the men of Judah, stolen thee, and have led the king and his house over Jordan, and all the men of David with him?
2SA 19:42 And each man of Judah answered to the men of Israel, For the king is near of kin to me; why art thou wroth upon this thing? Whether we have eaten anything of the king’s, either gifts be given to us?
2SA 19:43 And a man of Israel answered to the men of Judah, and said, I am greater by ten parts to the king, and David pertaineth more to me than to thee; why hast thou done wrong to me, and it was not told to me the former, that I should bring again my king? Forsooth the men of Judah answered harder to the men of Israel.
2SA 20:1 Also it befelled, that a man of Belial was there, Sheba by name, the son of Bichri, a man of the generation of Benjamin; and he sounded with a trump, and said, No part is to us in David, neither heritage in the son of Jesse; thou Israel, turn again into thy tabernacles.
2SA 20:2 And all Israel was parted from David, and followed Sheba, the son of Bichri; and the men of Judah cleaved to their king, from Jordan till to Jerusalem.
2SA 20:3 And when the king had come into his house in Jerusalem, he took [[the]] ten women, his secondary wives, which he had left to keep the house, and he betook them into keeping, and gave meat to them; and he entered not [[in]] to them; but they were enclosed till to the day of their death, and lived in widowhood.
2SA 20:4 And David said to Amasa, Call thou together to me all the men of Judah into the third day, and be thou present.
2SA 20:5 Therefore Amasa went forth, that he call together the people of Judah; and he dwelled over the covenanted time, which the king had set to him.
2SA 20:6 And David said to Abishai, Now Sheba, the son of Bichri, shall torment us more than Absalom did; therefore take the servants of thy lord, and pursue him, lest in hap he find strengthened cities, and escape us.
2SA 20:7 Therefore the men of Joab went out with Abishai, and Cherethites and Pelethites, and all the strong men, went out of Jerusalem to pursue Sheba, the son of Bichri.
2SA 20:8 And when they were beside the great stone, which is in Gibeon, Amasa came, and ran to them; and Joab was clothed with a strait coat at the measure of his shape, and he was girded above with a sword hanging down unto his entrails in a sheath; and it went out, and felled down.
2SA 20:9 And so Joab said to Amasa, Hail, my brother! And Joab held with his right hand the chin of Amasa, as kissing him.
2SA 20:10 Forsooth Amasa took not keep of the sword, which sword Joab had, and Joab smote Amasa in the side, and shedded out his entrails into the earth, and Amasa was dead; and Joab added not the second wound. And Joab, and Abishai, his brother, pursued Sheba, the son of Bichri.
2SA 20:11 In the meantime, when some of the children of David, of the fellows of Joab, had stood beside the dead body of Amasa, they said, Lo! he that would be the fellow of David, be for Joab.
2SA 20:12 And Amasa was besprinkled with blood, and lay in the middle of the way. Some man saw this, that all the people abode to see Amasa, and he removed Amasa from the way into the field, and he covered Amasa with a cloth, lest men passing by should abide [[still]] for him.
2SA 20:13 Therefore when he was removed from the way, each man passed forth, pursuing [[or following]] Joab to pursue Sheba, the son of Bichri.
2SA 20:14 Forsooth Sheba had passed by all the lineages of Israel till into Abel, and into Bethmaacah; and all the chosen men were gathered to him.
2SA 20:15 Therefore they came, and fought against him in Abel, and in Beth-maacah, and encompassed the city with strongholds; and the city was besieged. And all the company, that was with Joab, enforced or endeav-oured to destroy the walls.
2SA 20:16 And a wise woman of the city cried on high, Hear ye! hear ye! say ye to Joab, Nigh thou hither, and I shall speak with thee.
2SA 20:17 And when he had nighed to her, she said to him, Art thou Joab? And he answered, I am. To whom she spake thus, Hear thou the words of thine handmaid. Joab answered, I hear.
2SA 20:18 And again she said, A word was said in eld [[or old]] proverb, They that ask, ask in Abel; and so they profited.
2SA 20:19 Whether I am not, that answer truth to Israel? and seekest thou to destroy a city, and to do away a mother city in Israel? why castedest or throwest thou down the heritage of the Lord?
2SA 20:20 And Joab answered, and said, Far be, far be this from me; I cast not down, neither I destroy.
2SA 20:21 The thing hath not so itself; but a man of the hill of Ephraim, Sheba, the son of Bichri, by surname, raised his hand against king David; betake ye him alone to us, and we shall go away from the city. And the woman said to Joab, Lo! his head shall be sent to thee by the wall.
2SA 20:22 Then the woman went in to all the people, and she spake to them wisely; and they threw out to Joab the head of Sheba, the son of Bichri, girded off. And Joab sounded with a trump, and they departed from the city, each man into his tabernacles; and Joab turned again to Jerusalem to the king.
2SA 20:23 Therefore Joab was on all the host of Israel; forsooth Benaiah, [[the]] son of Jehoiada, was on Cherethites and Pelethites;
2SA 20:24 and Adoram was upon the tributes; and Jehoshaphat, the son of Ahilud, was chancellor;
2SA 20:25 and Sheva was scribe; but Zadok and Abiathar were priests;
2SA 20:26 and Ira of Jairites was the priest of David.
2SA 21:1 And hunger was made in the land of Israel in the days of David, by three years continually. And David counselled the answer of the Lord, that is, asked counsel of the Lord in the answering place; and the Lord said, It is for Saul, and for his house, and for [[the]] blood, for he killed the men of Gibeon.
2SA 21:2 Therefore when [[the]] Gibeonites were called, the king said to them; soothly Gibeonites be not of the sons of Israel, but they be the relics or remnants of Amorites; and the sons of Israel had sworn to them, that they should not slay them, and Saul would smite them for his fervent love, as for the sons of Israel and of Judah;
2SA 21:3 therefore David said to Gibeonites, What shall I do to you, and what shall be your amends, that ye bless the heritage of the Lord?
2SA 21:4 And Gibeonites said to him, No question is to us upon gold and silver, but against Saul, and against his house; neither we will, that a man of Israel be slain. To whom the king said, What therefore will ye, that I do to you?
2SA 21:5 And they said to the king, We owe so to do away the man, that defouled and oppressed us wickedly, that not one soothly be left of his generation in all the coasts of Israel.
2SA 21:6 Seven men of his sons be given to us, that we crucify them to the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, sometime the chosen man of the Lord. And the king said, I shall give them to you.
2SA 21:7 And the king spared Mephibo-sheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, for the oath of the Lord, that was betwixt David and Jonathan, the son of Saul.
2SA 21:8 And so the king took two sons of Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah, which she childed to Saul, Armoni, and Mephibosheth; and he took[[the]] five sons of Michal, the daughter of Saul, which she engendered to Adriel, the son of Barzillai, that was of Meholathites.
2SA 21:9 And he gave them into the hands of Gibeonites, and they did those seven sons upon a cross in an hill before the Lord; and these seven fell down slain together in the days of the first reaping, when the reaping of barley began.
2SA 21:10 Forsooth Rizpah, daughter of Aiah, took an hair-shirt, and arrayed to herself a place above the stone or laid it under her upon a stone, from the beginning of harvest till water dropped on them from heaven; and she suffered not birds to tear them by day, neither beasts by night.
2SA 21:11 And those things which Rizpah, the secondary wife of Saul, the daughter of Aiah, had done, were told to David.
2SA 21:12 And David went, and took the bones of Saul, and the bones of Jonathan, his son, from the men of Jabesh of Gilead; which had stolen those bones from the street of Bethshan, in which Philistines had hanged them, when they had slain Saul in Gilboa.
2SA 21:13 And David bare out from thence the bones of Saul, and the bones of Jonathan, his son; and they gathered the bones of them that were crucified,
2SA 21:14 and they buried those [[or them]] with the bones of Saul and of Jonathan, his son, in the land of Benjamin, in the side of the sepulchre of Kish, the father of Saul. And they did all things, whatever the king commanded them; and the Lord did mercy to the land after these things.
2SA 21:15 Forsooth battle of the Philistines was made again against Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines. Soothly when David failed,
2SA 21:16 Ishbibenob, that was of the kin of Harapha, that is, the father of the giants, and the iron of his spear weighed three hundred ounces, and he was girded with a new sword, enforced or endeavoured to smite David.
2SA 21:17 And Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, was in help to David; and he smote and killed the Philistine. Then the men of David swore, and said, Now thou shalt not go out with us into battle, lest thou quench the lantern of Israel.
2SA 21:18 Also the second battle was in Gob against [[the]] Philistines; then Sibbechai of Hushathites smote Saph, of the gen-eration of Harapha, of the kin of giants.
2SA 21:19 Also the third battle was in Gob against [[the]] Philistines; in which battle a man given of God, the son of a forest, and an embroiderer, a man of Bethlehem, smote the brother of Goliath of Gath, whose spear shaft was as a beam of webs or a weaver.
2SA 21:20 The fourth battle was in Gath; wherein was an high man, that had six fingers in his hands and six toes in his feet, that is, four and twenty digits; and he was of the kin of Harapha, that is, the father of the giants;
2SA 21:21 and he blasphemed Israel; and Jonathan, the son of Shimeah, the brother of David, killed him.
2SA 21:22 These four were born of Harapha in Gath, and they felled down in the hand of David, and of his servants.
2SA 22:1 Soothly David spake to the Lord the words of this song, in the day in which the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul.
2SA 22:2 And David said, The Lord is my stone, and my strength or my strong-hold, and my saviour;
2SA 22:3 my God, my strength, I shall hope into him; my shield, and the horn of mine health, my raiser up, and my refuge; my saviour, thou shalt deliver me from wickedness, that is, hast delivered.
2SA 22:4 I shall inwardly call the Lord, worthy to be praised; and I shall be safe from mine enemies.
2SA 22:5 For the sorrows of death com-passed me; the strands [[or streams]] of Belial made me afeared.
2SA 22:6 The cords of hell encompassed me; the snares of death have gone before me.
2SA 22:7 In tribulation I shall call thee, Lord, that is, I have called thee, Lord, and I shall cry to my God; and he heard from his holy temple my voice, and my cry shall come to his ears.
2SA 22:8 The earth was moved, and trembled; the foundaments of hills were smitten and shaken together, for the Lord was wroth to them.
2SA 22:9 Smoke went up from his nostrils, and fire of his mouth shall devour; coals were kindled of it.
2SA 22:10 And he bowed heavens, and came down; and mist under his feet.
2SA 22:11 And he went upon cherubim, and flew; and he slid [[up]] on the pens or wings of the wind.
2SA 22:12 He put darkness a hiding place in his compass, and riddled or winnowed waters from the clouds of heavens;
2SA 22:13 for brightness in his sight coals of fire were kindled.
2SA 22:14 The Lord shall thunder from heavens; and [[the]] high God shall give his voice.
2SA 22:15 He sent his arrows, and scattered them; and sent lightnings, and wasted them.
2SA 22:16 And the sheddings out of the sea appeared, and the foundaments of the world were showed; from the blaming of the Lord, from the breathing of the spirit of his strong vengeance.
2SA 22:17 He sent from heaven, and took me; and drew me out of many waters.
2SA 22:18 He delivered me from my might-iest enemy, and from them that hated me; for they were stronger than I.
2SA 22:19 They came before me in the day of my tormenting; and the Lord was made my steadfastness.
2SA 22:20 And he led me out into largeness, and he delivered me; for I pleased him.
2SA 22:21 The Lord shall yield to me after my rightwiseness; and he shall yield to me after the cleanness of mine hands.
2SA 22:22 For I [[have]] kept the ways of the Lord; and I did not turn wickedly from my God.
2SA 22:23 For all his dooms were in my sight; and I did not away from me his behests.
2SA 22:24 And I shall be perfect with him; and I shall keep me from my wicked-ness.
2SA 22:25 And the Lord shall restore to me after my rightwiseness; and after the cleanness of mine hands in the sight of his eyes.
2SA 22:26 With the holy thou shalt be holy, and with the strong, that is, to suffer adversities patiently, thou shalt be perfect;
2SA 22:27 and with a chosen man thou shalt be chosen, and with a wayward man thou shalt be made wayward.
2SA 22:28 And thou shalt make safe a poor people; and with thine eyes thou shalt make low them that be high.
2SA 22:29 For thou, Lord, art my lantern, and thou, Lord, shalt lighten my darkness.
2SA 22:30 For I girded, that is, made ready to battle, shall run in thee, that is, in thy strength; and in my God I shall skip over the wall.
2SA 22:31 God, his way is without wem; the speech of the Lord is examined with fire, that is, is pure and clean as metal proved in the furnace; he is a shield of all men hoping in him.
2SA 22:32 For who is God, except the Lord; and who is strong, except our God?
2SA 22:33 God, that hath girded me with strength, and hath made plane my perfect way;
2SA 22:34 and he hath made even my feet with harts’, and hath set me upon mine high things;
2SA 22:35 and he taught mine hands to battle, and a brazen bow was granted to mine arms.
2SA 22:36 Thou hast given to me the shield of thine health; and thy mildness hath multiplied me.
2SA 22:37 Thou shalt alarge my steps under me; and mine heels shall not fail.
2SA 22:38 I shall pursue mine enemies, and I shall all-brake them; and I shall not turn again, till I waste them.
2SA 22:39 I shall waste them, and I shall break them, that they rise not; they shall fall under my feet.
2SA 22:40 Thou hast girded me with strength to battle; thou hast bowed under me them that stood against me.
2SA 22:41 Thou hast given mine enemies’ aback to me, men hating me; and I shall destroy them.
2SA 22:42 They shall cry, that is, to idols either to men’s help, and none shall be that shall save them; they shall cry to the Lord, and he shall not hear them.
2SA 22:43 I shall do away them as the dust of [[the]] earth; I shall pound them, and I shall do [[them]] away as the clay, or the fen, of streets.
2SA 22:44 Thou shalt save me from [[the]] against-sayings of my people; thou shalt keep me into the head of folks; the people, whom I know not, shall serve me.
2SA 22:45 Alien sons shall not against-stand me; by hearing of [[the]] ear, they shall obey to me.
2SA 22:46 Alien sons floated away; and they shall be drawn together in their enclosings.
2SA 22:47 The Lord liveth, and my God is blessed; and the strong God of mine health shall be enhanced.
2SA 22:48 God, that givest vengeances to me, and hast cast down peoples under me.
2SA 22:49 Which leadest me out from mine enemies, and raisest me from men against-standing me; thou shalt deliver me from the wicked man.
2SA 22:50 Therefore, Lord, I shall acknowl-edge to thee in heathen men; and I shall sing to thy name.
2SA 22:51 That he maketh great the healths of his king; and doeth mercy to his christ, David, and to his seed till into without end.
2SA 23:1 Forsooth these be the last words, which David, the son of Jesse, said. The words that the man said, to whom it is ordained of Christ, of the God of Jacob, the noble psalm-maker of Israel;
2SA 23:2 The spirit of the Lord spake by me, and his word by my tongue.
2SA 23:3 David said, God of Israel spake to me, the strong help of Israel, the just [[or rightwise]] Lord of men, is Lord in the dread of God.
2SA 23:4 As the light of the morrowtide, when the sun riseth early, is bright without clouds; and as an herb cometh forth of the earth by rains.
2SA 23:5 And mine house is not so great with God, that he should make with me everlasting covenant, steadfast and made strong in all things; for all mine health is of him, and all my will, that is, all my desire, goeth into him, and nothing is thereof, that maketh not fruit.
2SA 23:6 Forsooth all trespassers shall be drawn out as thorns, that be not taken with hands.
2SA 23:7 And if any man will touch those [[or them]], he shall be armed with iron, and with a piece of wood formed into a spear; and the thorns shall be kindled, and shall be burnt till to nought.
2SA 23:8 These be the names of the strong men of David. David sitteth in the chair, the wisest prince among the three; he is as a most tender worm of a tree, that killed eight hundred with one fierceness.
2SA 23:9 After him was Eleazar, the son of his father’s brother, Ahohite; he was among [[the]] three strong men, that were with David, when they said shame to the Philistines, and were gathered thither into battle. And when the men of Israel had gone up,
2SA 23:10 he/Eleazar stood in battle, when his fellows went aback, and smote the Philistines, till that his hand failed, and was stark with or fixed to the sword. And the Lord made great health or victory in that day; and the people that fled turned again, to draw away the spoils of [[the]] slain men.
2SA 23:11 And after him was Shammah, the son of Agee, of Hararites. And Philistines were gathered in the station; and there was a field full of lentils, or vetches; and when the people of Israel[[had]] fled from the face of Philistines,
2SA 23:12 he stood in the midst of the field, and beheld it, for he defended the field; and he smote the Philistines, and the Lord made there [[a]] great health.
2SA 23:13 Also and three men went down before, that were princes among the thirty, and came to David in the time of reaping into the den of Adullam. And the tents of Philistines were set in the valley of giants.
2SA 23:14 And David was in a stronghold; and the station of Philistines was then in Bethlehem.
2SA 23:15 Then David desired water of the well, and said, If any man would give to me drink of the water of the cistern, which is in Bethlehem, beside the gate.
2SA 23:16 Therefore the three strong men brake into the tents of Philistines, and drew water of the cistern of Beth-lehem, that was beside the gate, and they brought it to David; and he would not drink, but offered it to the Lord,
2SA 23:17 and said, The Lord be merciful to me, that I do not this; whether I shall drink the blood of these men, that went forth, and the peril of their lives? Therefore he would not drink. The Three full strong men did these things.
2SA 23:18 Also Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was prince of [[the]] three; he it is that raised his spear against three hundred men, which he killed; he was named among [[the]] three,
2SA 23:19 and was the nobler among the three, and he was the prince of them; but he came not to the three first men.
2SA 23:20 And Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, the strongest man of great works, of Kabzeel, he smote [[the]] two lions of Moab, that is, two knights hardy as lions or two strong hardy knights; and he went down, and smote a lion in the middle of a cistern in the days of snow.
2SA 23:21 Also he killed a man of Egypt, a man worthy of beholding, having a spear in his hand; and so when he had gone down with a rod to that man, by might he wrung out the spear from the hand of the man of Egypt, and killed him with his own spear.
2SA 23:22 Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, did these things; and he was named among [[the]] three strong men,
2SA 23:23 that were among the thirty nobler men; nevertheless he came not to the first three. And David made him a counsellor of private to himself.
2SA 23:24 Asahel, the brother of Joah, was among the thirty men; Elhanan, the son of his father’s brother, of Bethlehem;
2SA 23:25 Shammah, of Harodites; Elika, of Harodites;
2SA 23:26 Helez, of Paltites; Ira, the son of Ikkesh, of Tekoa;
2SA 23:27 Abiezer, of Anathoth; Mebunnai, of Hushathites;
2SA 23:28 Zalmon, of Ahohites; Maharai, of Netophah;
2SA 23:29 Heleb, the son of Baanah, and he was of Netophah; Ittai, the son of Ribai, of Gibeah, of the sons of Benjamin;
2SA 23:30 Benaiah, of Pirathon; Hiddai, of the strand [[or stream]] of Gaash;
2SA 23:31 Abialbon, of Arabah; Azmaveth, of Barhumites;
2SA 23:32 Eliahba, of Shaalbonites; the sons of Jashen, Jonathan, and Jashen;
2SA 23:33 Shammah, of Hararites; Ahiam, the son of Sharar, of Hararites;
2SA 23:34 Eliphelet, the son of Ahasbai, the son of Maachathite; Eliam, the son of Ahithophel, of Giloh;
2SA 23:35 Hezrai, of Carmel; Paarai, of Arbites;
2SA 23:36 Igal, the son of Nathan, of Zobah; Bani, of Gadites;
2SA 23:37 Zelek, of Ammonites; Nahari, of Beeroth, the squire of Joab, the son of Zeruiah;
2SA 23:38 Ira, of Ithrites; Gareb, and he was of Ithrites;
2SA 23:39 Uriah of Hittites; all these were seven and thirty men.
2SA 24:1 And the strong vengeance of the Lord added to be wroth against Israel, and he stirred against them David, saying to Joab, Go thou, and number thou Israel and Judah.
2SA 24:2 And the king said to Joab, the prince of his host, Go thou by all the lineages of Israel, from Dan till to Beersheba, and number thou the people, that I know the number thereof.
2SA 24:3 And Joab said to the king, Thy Lord God increase to this people, how great it is now, and again multiply he it an hundredfold in the sight of my lord the king; but what will or mean my lord the king to himself in such a thing?
2SA 24:4 But the word of the king overcame the words of Joab, and of the princes of the host; and Joab went out, and the princes of the knights, from the face of the king, that they should number the people of Israel.
2SA 24:5 And when they had passed [[over]] Jordan, they came into Aroer, to the right side of the city that is in the valley of Gad; and they passed forth by Jazer
2SA 24:6 into Gilead, and into the lower land of Hodshi, and they came into the woody places of Dan; and they went about beside Sidon,
2SA 24:7 and passed nigh the walls of Tyre, and nigh all the land of Hivites, and of Canaanites; and they came to the south of Judah, in[[to]] Beersheba.
2SA 24:8 And when all the land was com-passed, they came after nine months and twenty days into Jerusalem.
2SA 24:9 And so Joab gave the number of [[the]] describing of the people to the king. And of Israel were found nine hundred thousand of strong men, that drew out sword; and of Judah five hundred thousand of fighters.
2SA 24:10 And the heart of David smote him, that is, his conscience reproved him, after that the people was numbered; and David said to the Lord, I have sinned greatly in this deed; but, Lord, I pray, that thou turn away the wickedness of thy servant, for I have done full follily.
2SA 24:11 Therefore David rose early; and the word of the Lord was made to Gad, the prophet and seer, and said,
2SA 24:12 Go thou, and speak to David, The Lord saith these things, The choice of three things is given to thee; choose thou one, which thou wilt of these, that I do to thee.
2SA 24:13 And when Gad had come to David, he told to him, and said, Either hunger shall come to thee in thy land seven years; either three months thou shalt flee thine adversaries, and they shall pursue thee; either certainly three days pestilence shall be in thy land; now therefore deliver thou, either advise or examine thou, and see, what word I shall answer to him that sent me.
2SA 24:14 And David said to Gad, I am constrained on each side greatly; but it is better that I fall into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies be many, than into the hands of men.
2SA 24:15 And the Lord sent pestilence into Israel from the morrowtide till to the time ordained; and seventy thousand of men were dead of the people from Dan till to Beersheba.
2SA 24:16 And when the angel of the Lord had held forth his hand over Jerusalem, that he should destroy it, the Lord had mercy on the tormenting; and said to the angel smiting the people, It sufficeth now; withhold thine hand. And the angel of the Lord was beside the cornfloor of Araunah the Jebusite.
2SA 24:17 And David said to the Lord, when he had seen the angel slaying the people, I am he that have sinned, and I have done wickedly; what have these [[or they]] done, that be sheep? I beseech, thine hand be turned against me, and against the house of my father.
2SA 24:18 Forsooth Gad, the prophet, came to David in that day, and said to him, Go thou up, and ordain an altar to the Lord in the cornfloor of Araunah the Jebusite.
2SA 24:19 And David went up, after the word of Gad, which the Lord had commanded to him.
2SA 24:20 And Araunah beheld, and per-ceived, that the king and his servants passed over to him; and he went out, and worshipped the king with low cheer to the earth;
2SA 24:21 and said, What is the cause, that my lord the king cometh to his servant? To whom David said, That I buy of thee the cornfloor, and build an altar to the Lord, and the slaying cease, that is cruel in the people.
2SA 24:22 And Araunah said to David, My lord the king take, and offer, as it pleaseth to him; thou hast oxen into burnt sacrifice, and a wain and yokes of oxen into uses of wood.
2SA 24:23 Araunah gave, that is, would give, all things to the king. And Araunah said to the king, Thy Lord God receive thy vow.
2SA 24:24 To whom the king answered, and said, Not as thou wilt, but I shall buy it of thee for price, and I shall not offer to the Lord my God burnt sacrifices given freely. Therefore David bought the cornfloor for six hundred shekels of gold, and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.
2SA 24:25 And David builded there an altar to the Lord, and offered burnt sacrifices and peaceable sacrifices; and the Lord did mercy to the land, and the vengeance was refrained from Israel.
1KI 1:1 And king David waxed eld, and had full many days of age; and when he was covered with clothes, he was not made hot.
1KI 1:2 Therefore his servants said to him, Seek we to our lord the king a young waxing virgin; and stand she before the king, and nurse she him, and sleep in his bosom, and make hot our lord the king.
1KI 1:3 Therefore they sought a young waxing virgin, fair in all the coasts of Israel; and they found Abishag of Shunem, and they brought her to the king.
1KI 1:4 And the damsel was full fair, and she slept with the king, and ministered to him; forsooth the king knew not her fleshly.
1KI 1:5 And Adonijah, the son of Haggith, was raised up, and said, I shall reign. And he made to him a chariot, and knights, and fifty men, that ran before him.
1KI 1:6 Neither David, his father, reproved him any time, nor said, Why hast thou done this? But also he was full fair, the second child after Absalom;
1KI 1:7 and his word was with Joab, the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar, priest, that helped the parts of Adonijah.
1KI 1:8 But Zadok, the priest, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan, the prophet, and Shimei, and Cherethites and Pelethites, and all the strength of the host of David, were not with Adonijah.
1KI 1:9 Therefore when rams were offered, and calves, and all fat things, beside the stone [[of]] Zoheleth, that was nigh the well of Rogel, Adonijah called all his brethren, the sons of the king, and all the men of Judah, servants of the king.
1KI 1:10 Soothly he called not Nathan, the prophet, and Benaiah, and all the strong men, and Solomon, his brother.
1KI 1:11 And so Nathan said to Bathsheba, the mother of Solomon, Whether thou hast heard, that Adonijah, the son of Haggith, hath reigned, and our lord David knoweth not this?
1KI 1:12 Now therefore come thou, take thou counsel of me, and save thy life, and of Solomon, thy son.
1KI 1:13 Go thou, and enter to king David, and say thou to him, Whether not thou, my lord the king, hast sworn to me, thine handmaid, and saidest, that Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit in my throne? Why therefore reigneth Adonijah?
1KI 1:14 And yet while thou shalt speak there with the king, I shall come after thee, and fulfill thy words.
1KI 1:15 Therefore Bathsheba entered to the king in the closet or bed-place; and the king was full eld, and Abishag of Shunem ministered to him.
1KI 1:16 And Bathsheba bowed herself, and worshipped or honoured the king; to whom the king said, What wilt thou to thee?
1KI 1:17 And she answered, and said, My lord the king, thou hast sworn to thine handmaid by thy Lord God, Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit in my throne;
1KI 1:18 and lo! Adonijah hath reigned now, while thou, my lord the king, knowest not;
1KI 1:19 he hath slain oxen, and all fat things, and full many rams; and he hath called all the sons of the king, also Abiathar [[the]] priest, and Joab, the prince of the chivalry; but he called not Solomon, thy servant.
1KI 1:20 Nevertheless, my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel behold into thee, that thou show to them, who oweth to sit in thy throne, my lord the king, after thee;
1KI 1:21 and it shall be, when my lord the king hath slept with his fathers, I and my son Solomon shall be reckoned as sinners, that is, Adonijah shall put on us crimes, to deprive us from life.
1KI 1:22 While she spake yet with the king, Nathan, the prophet, came.
1KI 1:23 And they told to the king, and said, Nathan, the prophet, is present. And when he had entered in the sight of the king, and had worshipped him lowly to the earth,
1KI 1:24 Nathan said, My lord the king, saidest thou, Adonijah reign after me, and sit he on my throne?
1KI 1:25 For he came down today, and offered oxen, and fat things, and full many wethers; and he called all the sons of the king, [[and the princes of the host]], and also Abiathar, [[the]] priest; and when they ate, and drank before him, and said, King Adonijah live;
1KI 1:26 he called not me, thy servant, and Zadok, the priest, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and Solomon, thy son.
1KI 1:27 Whether this word went out from my lord the king, and thou showedest not to me, thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?
1KI 1:28 And king David answered, and said, Call ye Bathsheba to me. And when she had entered before the king, and had stood before him,
1KI 1:29 the king swore, and said, The Lord liveth, that hath delivered my life from all anguish;
1KI 1:30 for as I swore to thee by the Lord God of Israel, and said, Solomon, thy son, shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne for me, so I shall do today.
1KI 1:31 And Bathsheba, with her cheer bowed down into the earth, worship-ped the king, and said, My lord king David live without end.
1KI 1:32 And king David said, Call ye Zadok, the priest, to me, and Nathan, the prophet, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada. And when they had entered before the king,
1KI 1:33 the king said to them, Take with you the servants of your lord, and put ye my son Solomon upon my mule, and lead ye him into Gihon.
1KI 1:34 And [[there]] Zadok, the priest, and Nathan, the prophet, anoint him into king upon Israel and Judah; and ye shall sing with a trump, and ye shall say, Live king Solomon!
1KI 1:35 Ye shall go up after him, and ye shall come to Jerusalem; and he shall sit upon my throne, and he shall reign for me; and I shall command to him, that he be duke on Israel and on Judah.
1KI 1:36 And Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, answered to the king, and said, Amen; so speak the Lord God of my lord the king.
1KI 1:37 As the Lord was with my lord the king, so be he with Solomon, and make he the throne of Solomon higher than the throne of my lord king David.
1KI 1:38 Then Zadok, the priest, went down, and Nathan, the prophet, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and Cherethites, and Pelethites; and they putted [[or put]] Solomon upon the mule of David, the king, and they brought him into Gihon.
1KI 1:39 And Zadok, the priest, took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle, and anointed Solomon; and they sang with a clarion; and all the people said, Live king Solomon!
1KI 1:40 And all the multitude went up after him, and the people of men singing with pipes, and being glad with great joy; and the earth sounded of the cry of them.
1KI 1:41 And Adonijah heard, and all that were called of him to the feast; and then the feast was ended. But also Joab said, when the voice of the trump was heard, What will or mean it to itself the cry of the city making noise?
1KI 1:42 Yet while he spake, Jonathan, the son of Abiathar, the priest, came; to whom Adonijah said, Enter thou, for thou art a strong man, and telling good things.
1KI 1:43 And Jonathan answered to Adon-ijah, Nay; for our lord king David hath ordained Solomon king;
1KI 1:44 and David hath sent with Solomon Zadok, the priest, and Nathan, the prophet, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and Cherethites, and Peleth-ites; and they have put Solomon upon the mule of the king.
1KI 1:45 And Zadok, the priest, and Nathan, the prophet, have anointed him king in Gihon; and they came down from thence being glad, and the city resound-ed; this is the voice that ye heard.
1KI 1:46 But also Solomon sitteth on the throne of realm;
1KI 1:47 and the servants of the king have entered, and have blessed our lord king David, and said, God make large the name of Solomon above thy name, and make great his throne above thy throne. And king David worshipped in his bed;
1KI 1:48 and furthermore he spake these things, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that hath given today a sitter in my throne, while mine eyes see.
1KI 1:49 Therefore all that were called of Adonijah to the feast, were afeared, and rose up, and each man went into his way.
1KI 1:50 And Adonijah dreaded Solomon, and rose up, and went into the tabernacle of the Lord, and he held the horn, or corner, of the altar.
1KI 1:51 And they told to Solomon, and said, Lo! Adonijah dreadeth the king Solomon, and he holdeth the horn, or corner, of the altar, and said, King Solomon swear to me today, that he shall not slay his servant with sword.
1KI 1:52 And Solomon said, If he is a good man, soothly not an hair of him shall fall into the earth; but if evil be found in him, he shall die.
1KI 1:53 Therefore king Solomon sent, and led out Adonijah from the altar; and he entered, and worshipped king Solomon; and Solomon said to him, Go into thine house.
1KI 2:1 Forsooth the days of David nighed, that he should die; and he commanded to Solomon, his son, and said,
1KI 2:2 Lo! I enter into the way of all earth; be thou comforted, and be thou a strong man.
1KI 2:3 And keep thou the keepings and the behests of thy Lord God, that thou go in his ways, and keep his ceremonies, and his behests, and his dooms, and witnessings, as it is written in the law of Moses; that thou under-stand all things which thou doest, and whither ever thou shalt turn thee.
1KI 2:4 That the Lord confirm his words, which the Lord spake of me, and said, If thy sons keep my ways, and go before me in truth, in all their heart, and in all their soul, a man shall not be taken away of thee from the throne of Israel.
1KI 2:5 Also thou knowest what things Joab, the son of Zeruiah, did to me; what things he did to [[the]] two princes of the host of Israel, to Abner, the son of Ner, and to Amasa, the son of Jether, which he killed, and shedded the blood of battle in peace; and putted [[or put]] the blood of battle in his girdle, that was about his loins, and in his shoes, that was in his feet.
1KI 2:6 Therefore thou shalt do by thy wisdom, and thou shalt not lead forth his hoariness peaceably to hells, either sepulchre.
1KI 2:7 But also thou shalt yield grace to the sons of Barzillai of Gilead, and they shall be eating in thy board; for they met me, when I fled from the face of Absalom, thy brother.
1KI 2:8 Also thou hast with thee Shimei, the son of Gera, the son of Benjamin, of Bahurim, the which Shimei cursed me by the worst cursing, when I went to the defensible places; but for-thy he came down to me into my meeting, when I passed over the Jordan, and I swore to him by the Lord, and said, I shall not slay thee with sword,
1KI 2:9 do not thou suffer him to be unpunished; forsooth thou art a wise man, and thou shalt know what thou shalt do to him, and thou shalt lead forth his hoar hairs with blood to hells [[or hell]].
1KI 2:10 And David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David.
1KI 2:11 And the days, in which David reigned upon Israel, be forty years; in Hebron he reigned seven years, and in Jerusalem three and thirty years.
1KI 2:12 Forsooth Solomon sat upon the throne of David, his father, and his realm was made steadfast greatly.
1KI 2:13 And Adonijah, the son of Haggith, entered to Bathsheba, the mother of Solomon; and she said to him, Whether thine entering is peaceable? And he answered, It is peaceable.
1KI 2:14 And he added, A word of me is to thee. And she said, Speak thou.
1KI 2:15 And he said, Thou knowest that the realm was mine, and all Israel purposed to make me into king to them; but the realm is translated or transferred, and is made my brother’s; for of the Lord it is ordained to him.
1KI 2:16 Now therefore I pray of thee one asking; shame thou not my face. And she said to him, Speak thou.
1KI 2:17 And he said, I pray, that thou say to Solomon the king; for he may not deny anything to thee; that he give me Abishag of Shunem to wife.
1KI 2:18 And Bathsheba said, Well, I shall speak for thee to the king.
1KI 2:19 Therefore Bathsheba came to king Solomon, to speak to him for Adonijah; and the king rose against the coming of her, and worshipped her, and sat on his throne; and a throne was set to the mother of the king, and she sat at his right side.
1KI 2:20 And she said to him, I pray of thee one little asking; shame thou not my face. And the king said to her, My mother, ask thou; for it is not leaveful that I turn away thy face.
1KI 2:21 And she said, Abishag of Shunem be given wife to Adonijah, thy brother.
1KI 2:22 And king Solomon answered, and said to his mother, Why askest thou Abishag of Shunem to Adonijah? Ask thou to him also the realm; certainly he is mine elder brother, and he hath Abiathar, priest, and Joab, the son of Zeruiah.
1KI 2:23 Therefore king Solomon swore by the Lord, and said, God do to me these things, and add these things too, for Adonijah hath spoken this word against his life.
1KI 2:24 And now the Lord liveth, that hath confirmed me, and hath set me on the throne of [[David]], my father, and that hath made to me an house, as he spake, for Adonijah shall be slain today.
1KI 2:25 And king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada; and Benaiah slew Adonijah, and he was dead.
1KI 2:26 Also the king said to Abiathar, the priest, Go thou into Anathoth, to thy field; and soothly thou art a man of death, that is, worthy of death, for conspiring against me, and David, my father; but today I shall not slay thee, for thou barest the ark of the Lord God before David, my father, and thou sufferedest travail in all things, in which my father travailed.
1KI 2:27 Therefore Solomon putted out Abiathar, that he should not be priest of the Lord, that the word of the Lord were [[ful]] filled, which he spake on the house of Eli in Shiloh.
1KI 2:28 And a messenger came to Solo-mon, and said that Joab had bowed after Adonijah, and that he had not bowed after Solomon. Therefore Joab fled into the tabernacle of the Lord, and took the horn of the altar.
1KI 2:29 And it was told to king Solomon, that Joab had fled into the tabernacle of the Lord, and was beside the altar; and Solomon sent Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and said, Go thou, and slay him.
1KI 2:30 And Benaiah came to the taber-nacle of the Lord, and said to Joab, The king saith these things, Go thou out. And he said, I shall not go out, but I shall die here. Benaiah told the word to the king, and said, Joab spake these things, and answered these things to me.
1KI 2:31 And the king said to Benaiah, Do thou as he hath spoken, and slay thou him, and bury him; and thou shalt remove the innocent blood, that was shed out of Joab, from me, and from the house of my father.
1KI 2:32 And the Lord yield on his head his blood, for he killed two just men, and better than himself, and he killed them by sword, while David, my father, knew not, Abner the son of Ner, the prince of the chivalry of Israel, and Amasa, the son of Jether, the prince of the host of Judah.
1KI 2:33 And the blood of them shall turn again into the head of Joab, and into the head of his seed without end; but peace be of the Lord till into without end to David, and to his seed, and to the house, and [[the]] throne of him.
1KI 2:34 Therefore Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, went up, and assailed Joab, and killed him; and Joab was buried in his house in desert.
1KI 2:35 And the king ordained Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, upon the host for Joab; and the king put Zadok the priest for Abiathar.
1KI 2:36 Also the king sent, and called Shimei, and said to him, Build to thee an house in Jerusalem, and dwell thou there, and thou shalt not go out from thence hither and thither;
1KI 2:37 for in whatever day thou goest out, and passest [[over]] the strand [[or stream]] of Kidron, know thou thee worthy to be slain; thy blood shall be on thine head.
1KI 2:38 And Shimei said to the king, The word of the king is good; as my lord the king spake, so thy servant shall do. And so Shimei dwelled in Jerusalem many days.
1KI 2:39 But it was done after three years, that the servants of Shimei fled to Achish, the son of Maachah, king of Gath; and it was told to Shimei, that his servants had gone into Gath.
1KI 2:40 And Shimei rose up, and saddled his ass, and went to Achish, into Gath, to seek his servants; and he brought them again from Gath.
1KI 2:41 And it was told to king Solomon, that Shimei had gone to Gath from Jerusalem, and had come again.
1KI 2:42 And Solomon sent, and called him, and said to him, Whether I witnessed not to thee by the Lord, and before-said to thee, In whatever day thou shalt go out hither and thither, know thou that thou shalt die; and thou answeredest to me, The word is good, which I heard?
1KI 2:43 Why therefore keptest thou not the oath of the Lord, and the command-ment which I commanded to thee?
1KI 2:44 And the king said to Shimei, Thou knowest all the evil, of which thine heart is guilty to thee, which evil thou didest to [[David]] my father; the Lord hath yielded thy malice into thine head.
1KI 2:45 And king Solomon shall be blessed; and the throne of David shall be stable before the Lord till into without end.
1KI 2:46 Therefore the king commanded to Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada; and he assailed Shimei, and smote him, and he was dead. Therefore the realm was confirmed into the hands of Solomon;
1KI 3:1 and by affinity, either alliance, he was joined to Pharaoh, king of Egypt; for he took the daughter of Pharaoh, and brought her into the city of David, till he [[ful]] filled building his house, and the house of the Lord, and the wall of Jerusalem by compass.
1KI 3:2 Nevertheless the people offered in high places; for the temple was not builded to the name of the Lord till into that day.
1KI 3:3 Soothly Solomon loved the Lord, and went in the behests of David, his father, except that Solomon offered in high places and burnt incense.
1KI 3:4 And so Solomon went into Gibeon, to offer there; for that was the most high place. Solomon offered upon that altar in Gibeon a thousand offerings into burnt sacrifice.
1KI 3:5 Soothly the Lord appeared to Solomon by sleep in the night, and said, Ask thou that, that thou wilt, that I give it to thee.
1KI 3:6 And Solomon said, Thou hast done great mercy with thy servant David, my father, as he went in thy sight, in truth, and [[in]] rightwiseness, and in rightful [[or right]] heart with thee; thou hast kept to him thy great mercy, and hast given to him a son, sitting on his throne, as it is today.
1KI 3:7 And now, Lord God, thou hast made thy servant to reign for David, my father; forsooth I am a little child, and not knowing mine out-going and mine in-coming.
1KI 3:8 And thy servant is in the midst of the people, which thou hast chosen, of [[a]] people without number, that may not be numbered and reckoned, for multitude.
1KI 3:9 Therefore thou shalt give to thy servant an heart able to be taught, that is, enlightened of thee, that he may deem thy people, and judge betwixt good and evil; for who may deem this people, thy people, this much people?
1KI 3:10 Therefore the word pleased before the Lord, that Solomon had asked such a thing.
1KI 3:11 And the Lord said to Solomon, For thou askedest this word, and askedest not to thee many days, neither riches, neither the lives of thine enemies, but thou askedest to thee wisdom to deem doom,
1KI 3:12 lo! I have done to thee after thy words, and I have given to thee a wise heart and an understanding, in so much that no man before thee was like thee, neither shall rise up after thee.
1KI 3:13 But also I have given to thee these things, which thou askedest not, that is, riches, and glory, that no man be like thee in kings in all times afterward.
1KI 3:14 Forsooth if thou goest in my ways, and keepest my biddings and [[my]] commandments, as thy father went in them, I shall make thy days long.
1KI 3:15 Therefore Solomon waked, and understood what the sweven was. And when he had come to Jerusalem, he stood before the ark of [[the]] bond of peace of the Lord, and he offered burnt sacrifices, and made peaceable sacrifices, and a great feast to all his household or menials.
1KI 3:16 Then two women whores came to the king, and stood before him;
1KI 3:17 of which one said, My lord, I beseech, I and this woman dwelled in one house, and I childed at her in a couch.
1KI 3:18 And in the third day after that I had childed, also this woman childed; and we were together in the house, and none other was with us in the house, except us twain [[or two]].
1KI 3:19 And the son of this woman was dead in the night, for she slept, and over-lay him;
1KI 3:20 and she rose up in the fourth part of the night in silence, and took my son from the side of me, while thine handmaid was sleeping, and she laid it in her bosom; and she putted [[or put]] in my bosom her son, that was dead.
1KI 3:21 And when I had risen early, to give milk to my son, he appeared dead; whom I beheld more diligently by clear light, and I perceived, that he was not mine, whom I had engendered.
1KI 3:22 The tother woman answered, It is not as thou sayest, but thy son is dead; forsooth my son liveth. The contrary, she said, Thou liest; for my son liveth, and thy son is dead. And by this manner they strove before the king.
1KI 3:23 Then the king said, This woman saith, My son liveth, and thy son is dead; and this woman answereth, Nay, but thy son is dead, and my son liveth.
1KI 3:24 Therefore the king said, Bring ye to me a sword. And when they had brought a sword before the king,
1KI 3:25 he said, Part ye the quick young child in two parts, and give ye the half part to the one, and the half part to the tother.
1KI 3:26 And the woman, whose son was quick, said to the king; for her entrails were moved on her son; Lord, I beseech, give ye to her the quick child, and do not ye slay him. The contrary, she said, Be he neither to me, neither to thee, but be he parted.
1KI 3:27 The king answered, and said, Give ye to this woman the young child quick, and be he not slain; forsooth this is his mother.
1KI 3:28 Therefore all Israel heard the doom, which the king had deemed; and they dreaded the king, and saw, that the wisdom of God was in him, to make doom.
1KI 4:1 Forsooth king Solomon was reign-ing on all Israel.
1KI 4:2 And these were the princes which he had; Azariah, the son of Zadok, the priest;
1KI 4:3 Elihoreph, and Ahiah, sons of Shisha, were scribes; Jehoshaphat, the son of Ahilud, was chancellor;
1KI 4:4 Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, was prince upon the host; and Zadok and Abiathar were priests;
1KI 4:5 Azariah, the son of Nathan, was upon them that stood nigh [[to]] the king; Zabud, the son of Nathan, was[[a]] priest, a friend of the king;
1KI 4:6 and Ahishar was steward of the house; and Adoniram, the son of Abda, was upon the tributes.
1KI 4:7 Forsooth Solomon had twelve prefects, either chief ministers, on all Israel, that gave lifelode to the king, and to his house; soothly by each month by itself in the year, each prefect by himself ministered necessaries.
1KI 4:8 And these be the names of them; Ben-hur, in the hill of Ephraim;
1KI 4:9 Ben-dekar, in Makaz, and in Shaal-bim, and in Bethshemesh, and in Elon, and in Bethhanan;
1KI 4:10 Ben-hesed, in Aruboth; and Soch-oh, and all the land of Hepher, was his;
1KI 4:11 Ben-abinadab, whose was all Naph-ath, had Dor Taphath, the daughter of Solomon, to wife.
1KI 4:12 Baana, the son of Ahilud, governed Taanach, and Megiddo, and all Bethshean, which is beside Zartanah, under Jezreel, from Bethshean unto Abelmeholah, even against Jokneam.
1KI 4:13 Ben-geber, in Ramoth of Gilead, had Havoth-jair, of the son of Man-asseh, in Gilead; he was sovereign in all the country of Argob, which is in Bashan, to sixty great cities and walled, that had brazen locks.
1KI 4:14 Ahinadab, the son of Iddo, was sovereign in Mahanaim;
1KI 4:15 Ahimaaz was in Naphtali, but also he had Basmath, the daughter of Solomon, in wedlock;
1KI 4:16 Baanah, the son of Hushai, was in Asher, and in Aloth;
1KI 4:17 Jehoshaphat, the son of Paruah, was in Issachar;
1KI 4:18 Shimei, the son of Elah, was in Benjamin:
1KI 4:19 Geber, the son of Uri, was in the land of Gilead, and in the land of Sihon, king of Amorites, and in the land of Og, king of Bashan, and upon all things that were in that land.
1KI 4:20 The people of Judah and Israel were unnumberable, as the sand of the sea in multitude, eating, and drinking, and being glad.
1KI 4:21 Forsooth Solomon was in his lord-ship, and had all the realms, as from the flood of the land of Philistines, unto the last part of Egypt, of men offering gifts, that is, tributes, to him, and serving to him, in all the days of his life.
1KI 4:22 Forsooth the meat of Solomon was by each day, thirty cors of clean flour of wheat, and sixty cors of meal,
1KI 4:23 ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen of the pasture, and an hundred wethers, besides hunting of harts, of goats, and of bugles, and of birds made fat.
1KI 4:24 For he held all the country that was beyond the flood, as from Tiphsah unto Azzah, and all the kings of those countries; and he had peace by each part in compass.
1KI 4:25 And Judah and Israel dwelled without any dread, each man under his vine, and under his fig tree, from Dan unto Beersheba, in all the days of Solomon.
1KI 4:26 And Solomon had forty thousand cratches of horses for chariots, and twelve thousand of road horses;
1KI 4:27 and the foresaid prefects or chief masters of the king nourished those horses. But also with great busyness they gave [[the]] necessaries to the board of king Solomon, in their time;
1KI 4:28 also they brought barley, and forage of horses and of work beasts, into the place where the king was, after it was ordained to them.
1KI 4:29 Also God gave to Solomon wisdom, and prudence full much, and largeness of heart, as the sand that is in the brink of the sea.
1KI 4:30 And the wisdom of Solomon passed the wisdom of all [[the]] east men, and Egyptians;
1KI 4:31 and he was wiser than all men; he was wiser than Ethan the Ezrahite, and than Heman, and than Chalcol, and than Darda, the sons of Mahol; and he was named among all folks by compass.
1KI 4:32 And Solomon spake three thousand parables, and his songs were a thousand and five;
1KI 4:33 and he disputed of trees, from a cedar which is in Lebanon, till to the hyssop that goeth out of the wall; he disputed of work beasts, and birds, and of creeping beasts, and of fishes.
1KI 4:34 And they came from all peoples to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and from all the kings of [[the]] earth, that heard his wisdom.
1KI 5:1 Also Hiram, king of Tyre, sent his servants to Solomon; for he heard that they had anointed him king for his father; for Hiram was friend of David in all time.
1KI 5:2 And also Solomon sent to Hiram, and said,
1KI 5:3 Thou knowest the will of David, my father, and for he might not build an house to the name of his God, for [[the]] battles nighing by compass, till the Lord gave them under the step of his feet.
1KI 5:4 But now my Lord God hath given rest to me by compass, and none adversary is, neither evil assailing;
1KI 5:5 wherefore I think to build a temple to the name of my Lord God, as God spake to David, my father, and said, Thy son, whom I shall give to thee for thee upon thy throne, he shall build an house to my name.
1KI 5:6 Therefore command thou, that thy servants hew down to me cedars of the Lebanon; and my servants be with thy servants; and I shall give to thee the meed of thy servants, whatever thou shalt ask; for thou knowest, that in my people is not a man that can hew trees, as Sidonians or the men of Sidon can.
1KI 5:7 Therefore when Hiram had heard the words of Solomon, he was full glad, and said, Blessed be the Lord God today, that hath given to David the son most wise upon this people full much.
1KI 5:8 And Hiram sent to Solomon, and said, I have heard whatever things thou sentest to me; I shall do all thy will, in trees of cedars, and in trees of box.
1KI 5:9 My servants shall put down those trees from the Lebanon to the sea, and I shall array those trees in ships in the sea, unto the place that thou shalt signify to me; and I shall dress those [[or them]] there, that thou take those [[or them]]; and thou shalt give necessaries to me, that meat be given to mine house.
1KI 5:10 And so Hiram gave to Solomon cedar trees, and box trees, by all his will;
1KI 5:11 and Solomon gave to Hiram twenty thousand cors of wheat, into meat to his house, and twenty cors of purest oil; Solomon gave these things to Hiram by all years.
1KI 5:12 Also the Lord gave wisdom to Solomon, as he spake to him; and peace was betwixt Hiram and Solomon, and both they smote together bond of peace.
1KI 5:13 And king Solomon chose work-men out of all Israel; and the sum was thirty thousand of men.
1KI 5:14 And Solomon sent them into the Lebanon, ten thousand by each month by whiles, so that in two months by whiles they were in their houses; and Adoniram was on such a sum.
1KI 5:15 And so seventy thousand of them, that bare burdens, were to Solomon, and fourscore thousand of masons in the hills,
1KI 5:16 without the sovereigns, that were masters of all the works, by the number of three thousand and three hundred, commanding to the people, and to them that made work.
1KI 5:17 And the king commanded, that they should take great stones, and precious or heavy stones, into the foundament of the temple,
1KI 5:18 and that they should make those square; which stones the masons of Solomon and the masons of Hiram hewed. And [[the]] men of Byblos made ready [[the]] trees and stones, to the house to be builded.
1KI 6:1 Forsooth it was done in the four hundred and fourscore year of the going out of the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of the realm of Solomon, in the month Zif; that is, the second month of the fourth year of the realm of Solomon on Israel; he began to build an house to the Lord.
1KI 6:2 Forsooth the house which king Solomon builded to the Lord, had sixty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and thirty cubits in height.
1KI 6:3 And a porch was before the temple of twenty cubits of length, by the measure of the breadth of the temple; and the porch had ten cubits of breadth, before the face of the temple.
1KI 6:4 And Solomon made in the temple narrow windows withoutforth and large within.
1KI 6:5 And he builded on the wall of the temple, buildings of boards by compass, in the walls of the house, by compass of the temple, and of God’s answering place; and he made [[the]] sides in the compass.
1KI 6:6 The building of boards, that was under, had five cubits of breadth; and the middle building of boards was of six cubits of breadth; and the third building of boards was having seven cubits of breadth. And he put beams in the house by compass withoutforth, that those cleaved not to the walls of the temple.
1KI 6:7 And when the house was builded, it was built of perfectly hewn stones; and hammer, and ax, and all thing made of iron, were not heard in the house, while it was in building.
1KI 6:8 The door of the middle side was in the wall of the right half of the house; and by a vice men went up into the middle solar, and from the middle solar into the third solar.
1KI 6:9 And Solomon builded the house, and ended it. And Solomon covered the house with couples of cedar,
1KI 6:10 and he builded a building of boards over all the house, by five cubits of height, and covered the house with cedar wood.
1KI 6:11 And the word of the Lord was made to Solomon, and said,
1KI 6:12 This is the house, which thou buildest; if thou goest in my behests, and doest my dooms, and keepest all my commandments, and goest by those [[or them]], I shall make steadfast my word to thee, which word I spake to David, thy father;
1KI 6:13 and I shall dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel, and I shall not forsake my people Israel.
1KI 6:14 Therefore Solomon builded the house, and ended it;
1KI 6:15 and he builded the walls of the house within with boards of cedar, from the pavement of the house unto the highness of the wall, and unto the couples; and he covered them with wood of cedar within; and he covered the pavement of the house with boards of box wood.
1KI 6:16 And he builded a wall of boards of cedar of twenty cubits at the hinder part of the temple, from the pavement unto the higher parts; and he made the inner house of God’s answering place into the holy of holy things.
1KI 6:17 And that temple before the doors of God’s answering place was of forty cubits.
1KI 6:18 And all the house within was clothed with cedar, and had his smoothnesses, and his joinings made subtly, and engravings appearing above; all things were clothed with boards of cedar, and utterly a stone might not appear in the wall.
1KI 6:19 And Solomon made God’s answering place in the midst of the house, in the inner part, that he should set [[or put]] there the ark of bond of peace of the Lord.
1KI 6:20 And God’s answering place had twenty cubits of length, and twenty cubits of breadth, and twenty cubits of height; and he covered, and clothed it with purest gold; but also he clothed the altar with cedar.
1KI 6:21 Also he covered with purest gold the house before God’s answering place, or the oracle, and he fastened the plates with golden nails.
1KI 6:22 Nothing was in the temple that was not covered with gold; but also he covered with gold all the altar of God’s answering place.
1KI 6:23 And he made in God’s answering place two cherubims [[or cherubim]] of the trees of olives, of ten cubits of height;
1KI 6:24 one wing of cherub was of five cubits, and the tother wing of cherub was of five cubits, that is, having ten cubits, from the highness of the one wing till to the highness of the tother wing.
1KI 6:25 And the second cherub was of ten cubits in even measure; and one work was in the two cherubims,
1KI 6:26 that is, one cherub had the height of ten cubits, and in like manner the tother cherub.
1KI 6:27 And he set [[the]] cherubims [[or cherubim]] in the midst of the inner temple; and the cherubims [[or cher-ubim]] held forth their wings, and one wing touched the one wall, and the wing of the second cherub touched the tother wall; and the other wings in the middle part of the temple touched themselves together.
1KI 6:28 And he covered the cherubims [[or cherubim]] with gold, and all the walls of the temple by compass/about;
1KI 6:29 and he engraved them with di-verse engravings and smoothness; and he made in those walls cherubims [[or cherubim]], and palms, and diverse paintures, as standing forth and going out of the wall.
1KI 6:30 But also he covered with gold the pavement of the house, within and withoutforth.
1KI 6:31 And in the entering of God’s answering place he made two little doors of the trees of olives; and he made doorposts of five corners,
1KI 6:32 and [[the]] two doors of the trees of olives; and he engraved in those [[or them]] the painture of cherubims [[or cherubim]], and the likenesses of palms, and engravings above standing forth greatly; and he covered those [[or them]] with gold; and he covered as well the cherubims [[or cherubim]], as [[the]] palms, and other things, with gold.
1KI 6:33 And in the entering of the temple he made doorposts four-cornered of trees of olives;
1KI 6:34 and he made [[the]] two doors of the trees of box, each against other; and ever either door was double, and it was opened holding itself together.
1KI 6:35 And he engraved cherubims [[or cherubim]], and palms, and engravings appearing greatly; and he covered all things with golden plates, by square work at rule.
1KI 6:36 And he builded a large street, or an alley, within, by three orders of stones made fair, and by one order of wood of cedar.
1KI 6:37 The house of the Lord was founded in the fourth year of the realm of Solomon, in the month Zif;
1KI 6:38 and the house was made perfect, or ended, in all his work, and in all his vessels, either appurtenances, in the eleventh year, in the month [[of]] Bul; that is the eighth month; and he builded that house in seven years.
1KI 7:1 Forsooth Solomon builded his own house in thirteen years, and brought it till to perfection, or perfect end.
1KI 7:2 He builded an house of the forest, or out of the wood, of Lebanon, of an hundred cubits of length, and of fifty cubits of breadth, and of thirty cubits of height; and he builded four alleys betwixt the pillars of cedars; for he had hewn down [[the]] trees of cedars into pillars.
1KI 7:3 And he clothed all the chambers with walls of cedar; the which chamber was sustained, or borne up, with five and forty pillars. And one order had fifteen pillars, set against themselves together,
1KI 7:4 and beholding themselves each even against other by even space betwixt the pillars;
1KI 7:5 and on the pillars were four-square posts, even in all things.
1KI 7:6 And he made a porch of pillars of fifty cubits of length, and of thirty cubits of breadth; and he made an-other porch in the face of the greater porch; and he made pillars, and [[the]] pommels on the pillars.
1KI 7:7 Also he made a porch of the king’s seat, in which the seat of doom was; and he covered it with wood of cedar, from the pavement unto the highness.
1KI 7:8 And a little house, in which he sat to deem, was in the middle porch, by like work. Also Solomon made an house to the daughter of Pharaoh, whom he had wedded, by such work, by what manner work he made and this porch.
1KI 7:9 He made all things of precious stones, that were sawed at a rule and measure, both within and without-forth, from the foundament unto the highness of [[the]] walls, and within and till to the great street, either courtyard.
1KI 7:10 And the foundaments were of precious stones, great stones of ten, either of eight cubits;
1KI 7:11 and precious stones hewn of even measure were above; in like manner and of cedar.
1KI 7:12 And the greater court, either void space, was round, of three orders of hewn stones, and of one order of hewn cedar beams; also and in the inner large street of the house of the Lord, and in the porch of the house of the Lord.
1KI 7:13 Also king Solomon sent, and brought from Tyre, Hiram,
1KI 7:14 the son of a woman widow, of the lineage of Naphtali, of the father of a man of Tyre, a craftsman of brass, and full of wisdom, and understanding, and doctrine, or teaching, to make all work of brass. And when he had come to king Solomon, he made all his work.
1KI 7:15 And he made two pillars of brass, one pillar of eighteen cubits of height; and a line of twelve cubits compassed ever either pillar.
1KI 7:16 Also he made two pommels or capitals, molten of brass, which were set [[or put]] on the heads of the pillars; one pommel of five cubits of height, and the tother pommel of five cubits of height;
1KI 7:17 and by the manner of a net, and of chains knit together to themselves, by wonderful work. Ever either pommel of the pillars was molten; seven works like nets of orders were in one pommel, and seven works like nets in the tother pommel.
1KI 7:18 And he made perfectly the pillars, and two orders about all the works like nets, that those [[or they]] should cover the pommels, which were upon the highness of [[the]] pomegranates; in the same manner he did also to the second pommel.
1KI 7:19 And the pommels, that were upon the heads of the pillars in the porch, were made as by work of lily, of four cubits;
1KI 7:20 and again other pommels in the highness of [[the]] pillars above, by the measure of the pillar, set against the works like nets; and two hundred orders of pomegranates were in the compass of the second pommel.
1KI 7:21 And he set the two pillars in the porch of the temple; and when he had set the right half pillar, he called it by name Jachin, that is, steadfast; in like manner he raised up the second pillar, and he called the name thereof Boaz, that is, strength.
1KI 7:22 And he set upon the heads of the pillars a work by the manner of a lily; and the work of the pillars was made perfect.
1KI 7:23 Also he made a molten sea, that is, a washing vessel for priests, round in compass, of ten cubits from brink to brink; the highness thereof was of five cubits; and a cord of thirty cubits went about it by compass.
1KI 7:24 And the engraving under the brink compassed it, and it compassed or came about the sea by ten cubits; twain [[or two]] orders of engravings containing some stories were molten,
1KI 7:25 and stood upon twelve oxen; of which oxen three beheld to the north, and three to the west, and three to the south, and three to the east; and the sea was above upon those oxen, of which all the hinder things were hid within.
1KI 7:26 And the thickness of the sea was of four fingers, or a palm, and the brink thereof was as the brink of a cup, and as the leaf of a lily crooked again; the sea contained two thousand baths, that is, three thousand metretes.
1KI 7:27 And he made ten brazen found-aments or bases, each foundament of four cubits of length, and of four cubits of breadth, and of three cubits of highness.
1KI 7:28 And that work of the foundaments was raised betwixt; and engravings were between the jointures.
1KI 7:29 And between the little crowns and the circles were lions, oxen, and cherubims [[or cherubim]]; and in the jointures in like manner above; and under the lions and the oxen were as reins of bridles of brass hanging down.
1KI 7:30 And by each foundament were four wheels, and brazen axletrees; and by four parts were as little shoulder-ings under the washing vessel, the shoulderings, that is, short pillars to sustain the washing vessel, molten, and beholding against themselves together.
1KI 7:31 And the mouth of the washing vessel within was in the highness of the head, and that, that appeared withoutforth, was of one cubit, and it was all-round, and had altogether one cubit and an half; and diverse engravings were in the corners of [[the]] pillars, and the middle pillar between was square, not round.
1KI 7:32 And the four wheels, which were by [[the]] four corners of the found-ament, cleaved together to themselves under the foundament; one wheel had one cubit and an half of height.
1KI 7:33 And the wheels were such, which manner wheels be wont to be made in a chariot; and the axletrees, and the nave-stocks, and the spokes, and [[the]] felloes or the dowels of those wheels, all things were molten.
1KI 7:34 For also the four little shoulderings, by all the corners of one foundament, were joined together, and [[were]] molten of that foundament, that is, were molten together with that foundament, and made one body.
1KI 7:35 And in the highness of the founda-ment was a roundness, of one cubit and an half, so made craftily, that the washing vessel might be set above, having his portrayings, and diverse engravings of itself.
1KI 7:36 Also he engraved in those walls, that were of brass, and in the corners, cherubims [[or cherubim]], and lions, and palms, as by the likeness of a man standing, that those [[or they]] seemed not engraved, but put to by compass.
1KI 7:37 By this manner he made ten foundaments, by one melting out, and one measure, and like engraving.
1KI 7:38 Also he made ten washing vessels of brass; one washing vessel took, or held, forty baths, and it was of four cubits; and he put each washing vessel by itself by each foundament by itself, that is, ten.
1KI 7:39 And he made ten foundaments, five at the right half of the temple, and five at the left half; and he set the sea at the right half of the temple, against the east, at the south.
1KI 7:40 Also Hiram made cauldrons, and pans, and wine vessels; and he made perfectly all the work of king Solomon in the temple of the Lord.
1KI 7:41 He made two pillars, and two cords of the pommels, that is, circles compassing the pommels, at the manner of cords, upon the pommels of the pillars, and two works like nets, that those [[or they]] should cover the two cords, that were upon the heads of the pillars.
1KI 7:42 And he made pomegranates four hundred in two works like nets; and two orders of pomegranates in each work like a net, to cover the cords of the pommels, that were on the heads of [[the]] pillars.
1KI 7:43 And he made[[the]] ten founda-ments, and [[the]] ten washing vessels on the foundaments;
1KI 7:44 and one sea, and twelve oxen under the sea;
1KI 7:45 and cauldrons, and pans, and wine vessels. All the vessels, which Hiram made to king Solomon in the house of the Lord, were of latten.
1KI 7:46 And the king melted out those vessels in the field country of Jordan, in [[the]] clay land, betwixt Succoth and Zarthan.
1KI 7:47 And Solomon setted [[or put]] all the vessels in their places; but for the great multitude, no weight was of the brass.
1KI 7:48 And Solomon made all the vessels in the house of the Lord; soothly he made the golden altar, that is, the altar of incense, that was within the temple, and the golden board, upon which the loaves of setting forth were set;
1KI 7:49 and he made of most pure gold golden candlesticks, five at the right half, and five at the left half, against God’s answering place; and he made as the flowers of a lily, and golden lanterns above, and golden tongs;
1KI 7:50 and pots, and hooks, and vials, and mortars, and censers of purest gold; and the hinges of the doors of the inner house of the holy of holy things, and of the doors of the house of the temple, were of gold.
1KI 7:51 And Solomon performed all the work, that he made in the house of the Lord; and he brought in the things, which David, his father, had hallowed; silver, and gold, and vessels; and he kept those in the treasures of the house of the Lord.
1KI 8:1 Then all the greater men in birth in Israel, with [[the]] princes of the lineages, and the dukes of [[the]] meines of the sons of Israel, were gathered to king Solomon, into Jerusalem, that they should bear the ark of [[the]] bond of peace of the Lord from the city of David, that is, from Zion.
1KI 8:2 And all Israel came together [[to king Solomon]] in the month [[of]] Ethanim, that is September, in the solemn day; which is the seventh month.
1KI 8:3 And all the eld men of Israel came; and the priests took the ark,
1KI 8:4 and they bare the ark of the Lord, and the tabernacle of [[the]] bond of peace, and all the vessels of the saintuary, that were in the tabernacle; and the priests and deacons bare those [[or them]].
1KI 8:5 And king Solomon, and all the multitude of Israel, that came together to him, went with him before the ark; and they offered sheep and oxen, without guessing and number.
1KI 8:6 And [[the]] priests brought the ark of [[the]] bond of peace of the Lord into his place, into God’s answering place of the temple, into the holy of holy things, under the wings of the cherubims [[or cherubim]].
1KI 8:7 And the cherubims [[or cherubim]] spreaded forth their wings over the place of the ark; and they covered the ark, and the bars thereof above.
1KI 8:8 And when the bars stood forth, and the highness of those [[or them]] appeared without the saintuary, before God’s answering place, those bars appeared no further withoutforth; the which bars also were there unto this present day.
1KI 8:9 And in the ark was none other thing, no but [[the]] two tables of stone, which Moses in Horeb had put in the ark, when the Lord made bond of peace with the sons of Israel, when they went out of the land of Egypt.
1KI 8:10 And it was done when the priests had gone out of the saintuary, a cloud filled the house of the Lord;
1KI 8:11 and the priests might not stand and minister, for the cloud; for why the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord.
1KI 8:12 Then Solomon said, The Lord said, that he would dwell in a cloud or a mist.
1KI 8:13 I building have builded an house into thy dwelling place, into thy most steadfast throne without end.
1KI 8:14 And the king turned his face, and blessed all the church in Israel; for all the church of Israel stood.
1KI 8:15 And Solomon said, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that spake with his mouth to David, my father, and performed it in his hands, and said,
1KI 8:16 From the day in which I led my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose not a city of all the lineages of Israel, that an house should be builded, and my name should be there; but I chose David, that he should be over my people Israel.
1KI 8:17 And David, my father, would build or would have builded an house to the name of the Lord God of Israel.
1KI 8:18 And the Lord said to David, my father, That thou thoughtest in thine heart to build an house to my name, thou didest well, treating this same thing in thy soul;
1KI 8:19 nevertheless thou shalt not build an house to me, but thy son, that shall go out of thy reins, he shall build an house to my name.
1KI 8:20 The Lord hath now confirmed his word, that he spake; and I stood for David, my father, and I sat upon the throne of Israel, as the Lord spake; and I have builded an house to the name of the Lord God of Israel.
1KI 8:21 And I have ordained there a place of the ark, in which ark the bond of peace of the Lord is, which he smote with our fathers, when they went out of the land of Egypt.
1KI 8:22 And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord, in the sight of the church of Israel; and he held forth his hands against heaven,
1KI 8:23 and said, Lord God of Israel, no God in heaven above, neither on earth beneath, is like thee, which keepest covenant and mercy to thy servants, that go before thee in all their heart;
1KI 8:24 and thou keepest to David, my father, thy servant, those things which thou hast spoken to him; by mouth thou hast spoken it, and by hands thou hast fulfilled it, as this day proveth.
1KI 8:25 Now therefore, Lord God of Israel, keep thou to thy servant David, my father, those things which thou spakest to him, and saidest, A man of thee shall not be taken away from before me, which man shall sit on the throne of Israel, so nevertheless if thy sons keep thy way, that they go before me, as thou wentest in my sight.
1KI 8:26 And now, Lord God of Israel, thy words be made steadfast, which thou spakest to thy servant David, my father.
1KI 8:27 Therefore whether it is to guess, that God dwelleth verily on earth; for if heaven, and heaven of heavens be not able to take thee, how much more this house, that I have builded to thee.
1KI 8:28 But, my Lord God, behold thou to the prayer of thy servant, and to the beseechings of him; hear thou the hymn, either praising, and [[the]] prayer, which thy servant prayeth before thee today;
1KI 8:29 that thine eyes be opened on this house by night and day, on the house of which thou saidest, My name shall be there; that thou hear the prayer, which thy servant prayeth to thee in this place;
1KI 8:30 that thou hear the beseeching of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, whatever thing he prayeth in this place, and hear thou in the place of thy dwelling in heaven; and when thou hast heard, thou shalt be merciful.
1KI 8:31 If a man sinneth against a man, and hath any oath, by which he is holden bound, and cometh for the oath into thine house, before thine altar,
1KI 8:32 thou shalt hear in heaven, and thou shalt do, and thou shalt deem thy servants; and thou shalt condemn the wicked man, and shalt yield his way on his head, and thou shalt justify the just [[or rightwise]] man, and shalt yield to him after his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]].
1KI 8:33 If thy people Israel fleeth his enemies, for he shall do sin to thee, and they do penance, or repent their sin, and acknowledge to thy great name, and come, and worship, and beseech thee in this house,
1KI 8:34 hear thou in heaven, and forgive thou the sin of thy people [[Israel]]; and thou shalt lead them again into the land, which thou hast given to the fathers of them.
1KI 8:35 If heaven is closed, and it raineth not for the sins of them, and they pray in this place, and do penance to thy name, and be converted, or altogether turned, from their sins for their torment,
1KI 8:36 hear thou them in heaven, and forgive thou the sins of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, and show thou to them a good way, by which they shall go, and give thou rain to them upon the land, which thou hast given to them into possession.
1KI 8:37 If hunger riseth in the land, either pestilence is, either corrupt air is, either rust, either locust, either mildew, and if his enemy tormenteth him, and besiegeth the gates of him, and bringeth in all wound, all sickness,
1KI 8:38 all cursing, and all wishing of evil, that befalleth to each man of thy people Israel, if any man knoweth the wound of his heart, and holdeth forth his hands in this house,
1KI 8:39 thou shalt hear in heaven, in the place of thy dwelling, and thou shalt do mercy, and thou shalt do that thou give to each man after all his ways, as thou seest his heart; for thou alone knowest the heart of all the sons of men,
1KI 8:40 that they dread thee in all days in which they live on the face of the land, which thou hast given to our fathers.
1KI 8:41 Furthermore and when an alien, that is not of thy people Israel, cometh from a far land for thy name;
1KI 8:42 for thy great name, and thy strong hand, and thine arm stretched out, shall be heard everywhere; therefore when he cometh, and prayeth in this place,
1KI 8:43 thou shalt hear in heaven, in the firmament of thy dwelling place, and thou shalt do all things, for which the alien calleth thee; that all peoples of lands learn to dread thy name, as thy people Israel doeth, and prove [[they]], that thy name is called on this house, which I [[have]] builded.
1KI 8:44 If thy people goeth out to battle against his enemies, by the way whither ever thou sendest them, they shall pray thee against the way of the city which thou hast chosen, and over against the house that I have builded to thy name,
1KI 8:45 and thou shalt hear in heaven the prayers of them, and the beseechings of them, and thou shalt make the doom of them.
1KI 8:46 That if they sin to thee, for no man is that sinneth not, and thou art wroth, and betakest them to their enemies, and they be led prisoners into the land of enemies, far either nigh,
1KI 8:47 and they do penance in their heart in the place of their imprisoning, and be converted, or altogether turned, and beseech in their imprisoning, and say, We have sinned, we have done wickedly, we have done unfaithfully;
1KI 8:48 and they turn again to thee in all their heart, and in all their soul, in the land of their enemies, to which they be led prisoners, and they pray thee over against the way of their land, which thou hast given to their fathers, and of the city which thou hast chosen, and of the temple which I [[have]] builded to thy name,
1KI 8:49 thou shalt hear in heaven, in the firmament of thy seat, the prayers of them, and the beseechings of them, and thou shalt make the doom of them;
1KI 8:50 and thou shalt be merciful to thy people, that have sinned to thee, and to all the wickednesses, by which they have trespassed against thee; and thou shalt do mercy before those men, that had them prisoners, that those men do mercy to them.
1KI 8:51 For it is thy people, and thine heritage, which thou leddest out of the land of Egypt, from the midst of the iron furnace;
1KI 8:52 that thine eyes be open to the beseeching of thy servant, and of thy people Israel; and thou shalt hear them in all things, for which they call thee.
1KI 8:53 For thou hast separated them to thee into thine heritage from all the peoples of [[the]] earth, as thou spakest by Moses, thy servant, when thou, Lord God, leddest our fathers out of Egypt.
1KI 8:54 Forsooth it was done, when Solomon, praying the Lord, had filled all this prayer and beseeching, he rose up from [[the]] sight of the altar of the Lord; for he had set fast ever either knee to the earth, and he had held forth his hands to heaven.
1KI 8:55 Therefore he stood, and blessed all the church of Israel, and said with [[a]] great voice,
1KI 8:56 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that hath given rest to his people Israel, by all things which he spake; a word felled not down, soothly neither one, of all the goods which he spake by Moses, his servant.
1KI 8:57 Our Lord God be with us, as he was with our fathers, and forsake not us, neither cast us away;
1KI 8:58 but bow he our hearts to himself, that we go in all his ways, and keep his commandments, and ceremonies, and dooms, whichever he commanded to our fathers.
1KI 8:59 And these words of me, by which I have prayed before the Lord, be they nighing to our Lord God by day and night, that he make doom to me his servant, and to his people Israel by all days;
1KI 8:60 and all the peoples of [[the]] earth know, that the Lord himself is God, and [[there is]] none other without him.
1KI 8:61 Also our heart be perfect with our Lord God, that we go in his dooms, and keep his commandments, as also today.
1KI 8:62 Therefore the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifices before the Lord.
1KI 8:63 And Solomon slew peaceable sacrifices, which he offered to the Lord; of oxes two and twenty thousand, and of sheep sixscore thousand; and the king and the sons of Israel hallowed the temple of the Lord.
1KI 8:64 In that day the king hallowed the middle of the great street, that was before the house of the Lord; for he made there burnt sacrifice[[s]], and offering, and the inner fatness of peaceable things; for the brazen altar that was before the Lord was too little, and it might not take the burnt sacrifice, and the offering, and the inner fatness of peaceable things.
1KI 8:65 Therefore Solomon made in that time a solemn feast, and all Israel with him, a great multitude, from the entering of Hamath unto the strand [[or river]] of Egypt, before our Lord God, in seven days and seven days, that is, fourteen days.
1KI 8:66 And in the eighth day he delivered the peoples, which blessed the king, and went forth into their tabernacles, and they were glad and of joyful heart on all the goods that God had done to David, his servant, and to Israel, his people.
1KI 9:1 And it was done, when Solomon had performed the building of the house of the Lord, and the building of the king, and all thing that he coveted, and would make,
1KI 9:2 the Lord appeared to Solomon the second time, as he appeared to him in Gibeon.
1KI 9:3 And the Lord said to him, I have heard thy prayer, and thy beseeching, that thou hast besought before me; I have hallowed this house, that thou hast builded, that I should set [[or put]] there my name without end; and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there in all days.
1KI 9:4 Also if thou goest before me, as thy father went, in simpleness of heart, and in equity, and doest all things which I have commanded to thee, and keepest my dooms, and my lawful things,
1KI 9:5 I shall set the throne of thy realm upon Israel without end, as I spake to David, thy father, and said, A man of thy kin shall not be taken away from the throne of Israel.
1KI 9:6 Forsooth if by turning away, ye and your sons turn away, and pursue [[or follow]] not me, and keep not my behests and ceremonies, which I have set forth to you, but ye go, and worship alien gods, and honour them,
1KI 9:7 I shall do away Israel from the face of the land which I gave to them; and I shall cast away from my sight the temple, which I [[have]] hallowed to my name; and Israel shall be into a proverb and into a fable, to all peoples.
1KI 9:8 And this house shall be into ensample of God’s offence; each man that shall pass by it, shall wonder, and shall hiss, and shall say, Why hath the Lord done thus to this land, and to this house?
1KI 9:9 And they shall answer, For they forsook their Lord God, that led the fathers of them out of Egypt; and they pursued [[or followed]] alien gods, and worshipped them, and honoured them; therefore the Lord hath brought in upon them all this evil.
1KI 9:10 Soothly when twenty years were [[ful]] filled, after that Solomon had builded twain [[or two]] houses, that is, the house of the Lord, and the house of the king,
1KI 9:11 while Hiram, king of Tyre, gave to Solomon trees of cedar, and of fir, and gold, by all thing that he had needful; then Solomon gave to Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.
1KI 9:12 And Hiram went out of Tyre that he should see the cities, which Solo-mon had given to him, and those [[or they]] pleased not him;
1KI 9:13 and he said, Whether these be the cities, which thou, brother, hast given to me? And he called those cities the land of Cabul, that is, displeasing, unto this day.
1KI 9:14 Also Hiram sent to king Solomon sixscore talents of gold.
1KI 9:15 This is the rent, which Solomon raised, to build the house of the Lord, and his own house, and the Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.
1KI 9:16 For Pharaoh, king of Egypt, ascended or went up, and took Gezer, and burnt it by fire; and he killed Canaanites, that dwelled in the city, and gave it into a dower to his daughter, the wife of Solomon.
1KI 9:17 Therefore Solomon builded Gezer, and the lower Bethhoron,
1KI 9:18 and Baalath, and Tadmor in the land of wilderness;
1KI 9:19 and he made strong all the towns, that pertained to him, and were with-out wall, and the cities of chariots, and the cities of knights, and what-ever thing pleased him to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his power.
1KI 9:20 Solomon made tributaries unto this day all the people, that were left of the Amorites, Hittites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites, which be not of the sons of Israel,
1KI 9:21 the sons of these heathen men, that dwelled in the land, that is, which the sons of Israel might not destroy.
1KI 9:22 Soothly king Solomon ordained not any man of the sons of Israel to serve, that is, in vile works, and of the fields, but they were men of war, and servants of him, and princes, and dukes, and masters of his chariots and horses.
1KI 9:23 And five hundred and fifty princes were sovereigns over all the works of Solomon, the which princes had the people subject to them, and command-ed to [[the]] works ordained.
1KI 9:24 And the daughter of Pharaoh went up from the city of David into her house, which house Solomon had builded to her; then he builded the Millo.
1KI 9:25 Also Solomon offered in three times by all years burnt sacrifices and peaceable sacrifices, on the altar which he had builded to the Lord; and he burnt incense before the Lord, and the temple was performed.
1KI 9:26 Also king Solomon made a navy in Eziongeber, which is beside Elath, in the brink of the Red Sea, in the land of Idumea.
1KI 9:27 And Hiram sent in that navy his servants, those who were shipmen, and knowing of the sea, with the servants of Solomon;
1KI 9:28 and when they had come into Ophir, they brought from thence gold of four hundred and twenty talents to king Solomon.
1KI 10:1 But also the queen of Sheba, when the fame of Solomon was heard, came in the name of the Lord to assay him in dark and doubtful questions.
1KI 10:2 And she entered with much fellow-ship and riches into Jerusalem, and with camels bearing sweet smelling things, and gold greatly without number, and precious stones; and she came to king Solomon, and spake to him all things which she had in her heart.
1KI 10:3 And Solomon taught her all [[the]] words which she had put forth; no word was, that might be hid from the king, and which he answered not to her.
1KI 10:4 And the queen of Sheba saw all the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had builded,
1KI 10:5 and the meats of his table, and the dwelling places of his servants, and the orders of the men serving him, and the clothes of them, and the butlers, and the burnt sacrifices which he offered in the house of the Lord; and she had no more spirit.
1KI 10:6 And she said to the king, The word is true, that I heard in my land, of thy words, and of thy wisdom;
1KI 10:7 and I believed not to men telling to me, till I myself came, and saw with mine eyes, and proved that the half part was not told to me; thy wisdom is more and thy works, than the fame that I heard.
1KI 10:8 Thy men be blessed, and thy servants be blessed, these that stand before thee ever[[more]], and hear thy wisdom.
1KI 10:9 Blessed be thy Lord God, whom thou pleasedest, and hath set thee on the throne of Israel; for the Lord loved Israel without end, and hath ordained thee king, that thou shouldest do doom and rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]].
1KI 10:10 Therefore she gave to the king sixscore talents of gold, and full many sweet smelling things, and precious stones; so many sweet smelling things were no more brought, as those which the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
1KI 10:11 But also the ships of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought from Ophir full many trees of thyine, and precious stones.
1KI 10:12 And king Solomon made of the trees of thyine undersettings of the house of the Lord, and of the king’s house, and harps, and citoles to singers; such trees of thyine were not brought there, neither seen again, till into this present day.
1KI 10:13 Soothly king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all things which she would have, and asked of him, besides these things which he had given to her by the king’s gift will-fully; and she turned again, and went into her land with her servants.
1KI 10:14 Forsooth the weight of gold, that was offered to Solomon by each year, was of six hundred and six and sixty talents of gold,
1KI 10:15 besides that which the men that were on the tollages, that is, rents of things borne about in the land, and that merchants, and all men selling shields, and that all the kings of Arabia, and the dukes of the land, gave.
1KI 10:16 And king Solomon made two hundred shields of purest gold; he gave six hundred shekels of gold into the plates of one shield;
1KI 10:17 and he made three hundred buck-lers of proved gold; three hundred talents of gold covered one buckler. And the king put those bucklers in the house of the forest of Lebanon.
1KI 10:18 Also king Solomon made a great throne of ivory, and covered it with full fine gold;
1KI 10:19 and the throne had six degrees; and the highness of the throne was round in the hinder part; and twain [[or two]] hands were on this side and on that side, holding the seat, and two lions stood beside each hand;
1KI 10:20 and twelve little lions standing on [[the]] six degrees, on this side and on that side; such a work was not made in all realms.
1KI 10:21 But also all the vessels, of which king Solomon drank, were of gold, and all the appurtenance of the house of the forest of Lebanon was of purest gold; silver was not used at all, neither it was areckoned of any price in the days of Solomon.
1KI 10:22 For the ships of the king went once by three years with the ships of Hiram into Tharshish, and brought from thence gold, and silver, and teeth of elephants, and apes, and peacocks.
1KI 10:23 Therefore king Solomon was magnified above all [[the]] kings of [[the]] earth in riches and wisdom.
1KI 10:24 And all earth desired to see the cheer of Solomon, to hear the wisdom of him, which wisdom God had given in his heart.
1KI 10:25 And all men brought gifts to him, vessels of gold, and of silver, clothes, and armours [[or arms]] of battle, and sweet smelling things, and horses, and mules, by each year.
1KI 10:26 And Solomon gathered together chariots, and horsemen; and a thou-sand and four hundred chariots were made to him, and twelve thousand horsemen; and he disposed them by [[the]] strengthened cities, and with the king in Jerusalem.
1KI 10:27 And he made, that so great abundance of silver was in Jerusalem, how great was also of stones; and he gave the multitude of cedars as syca-mores, that grow in field places.
1KI 10:28 And the horses of Solomon were led out of Egypt, and of Coa; for merchants of the king bought them of Coa, and brought them to him, for [[the]] price ordained.
1KI 10:29 For a chariot went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty shekels; and by this manner all the kings of Hittites, and of Syria, sold horses.
1KI 11:1 Forsooth king Solomon loved burningly many alien women, and the daughter of Pharaoh, and women of Moab, and Ammonites, and Idu-means, and Sidonians, and Hittites;
1KI 11:2 of the folks of which the Lord said to the sons of Israel, Ye shall not enter to those folks, neither any of them shall enter to you; for most certainly they shall turn away your hearts, that ye follow the gods of them. And so king Solomon was coupled to these women, by most burning love.
1KI 11:3 And wives as queens were seven hundred to him, and three hundred secondary wives; and the women turned away his heart.
1KI 11:4 And when he was then eld [[or old]], his heart was beshrewd by women, that he pursued [[or followed]] alien gods; and his heart was not perfect with his Lord God, as the heart of David, his father, was perfect.
1KI 11:5 But Solomon worshipped Astarte, the goddess of Sidonians, and Chemosh, the god of Moabites, and Moloch, the idol of Ammonites;
1KI 11:6 and Solomon did that, that pleased not before the Lord, and he full-filled not that he pursued [[or followed]] the Lord, as David, his father.
1KI 11:7 Then Solomon builded a temple to Chemosh, the idol of Moab, in the hill which is against Jerusalem, and to Moloch, the idol of the sons of Ammon.
1KI 11:8 And by this manner he did to all his alien wives, the which burnt incenses, and offered to their gods.
1KI 11:9 Therefore the Lord was wroth to Solomon, for his soul was turned away from the Lord God of Israel; that appeared to him the second time,
1KI 11:10 and [[had]] commanded of this word, that he should not pursue [[or follow]] alien gods; and he kept not those things, which the Lord commanded to him.
1KI 11:11 Therefore the Lord said to Solomon, For thou haddest this thing with thee, and keptest not my covenant, and my behests, which I commanded to thee, I shall break, and I shall part thy realm, and I shall give it to thy servant.
1KI 11:12 Nevertheless I shall not do it in thy days, for David, thy father; I shall cut it from the hand of thy son;
1KI 11:13 neither I shall do away all the realm, but I shall give one lineage to thy son, for David, my servant, and for Jerusalem, which I chose.
1KI 11:14 Forsooth the Lord raised to Solomon an adversary, Hadad the Idumean, of the king’s seed, that was in Edom.
1KI 11:15 For when David was in Idumea, and Joab, the prince of his chivalry, had gone up to bury them that were slain, and he had slain each male kind in Idumea;
1KI 11:16 for Joab, and all Israel, dwelled there by six months, till they had killed each male kind in Idumea;
1KI 11:17 Hadad himself fled, and some men of Idumea, of the servants of his father, with him, that he should enter into Egypt; soothly Hadad was a little child.
1KI 11:18 And when they had risen from Midian, they came into Paran; and they took with them men of Paran, and entered into Egypt, to Pharaoh, king of Egypt; and Pharaoh gave an house to him, and ordained to him meats, and assigned to him land.
1KI 11:19 And Hadad found grace before Pharaoh greatly, in so much that Pharaoh gave to him a wife, the sister of his wife, that is, the sister of the queen, the sister of Tahpenes.
1KI 11:20 And the sister of Tahpenes engen-dered to him a son, Genubath; and Tahpenes nursed him in the house of Pharaoh; and Genubath dwelled before Pharaoh, with the sons of Pharaoh.
1KI 11:21 And when Hadad had heard in Egypt, that David slept with his fathers, and that Joab, the prince of chivalry, was dead, he said to Pharaoh, Suffer thou me, that I go into my land.
1KI 11:22 And Pharaoh said to him, And of what thing hast thou need with me, that thou seekest to go to thy land? And he answered, Of nothing; but I beseech thee, that thou deliver me or let me go.
1KI 11:23 And God raised up another adversary to Solomon, Rezon, the son of Eliadah, that fled Hadadezer, king of Zobah, his lord;
1KI 11:24 and [[he]] gathered men against him, and was made the prince of thieves, when David killed them of Zobah; and they went to Damascus, and dwelled there; and they made him king in Damascus.
1KI 11:25 And he was [[an]] adversary of Israel in all the days of Solomon; and this is besides the evil of Hadad, and his hatred against Israel; and he reigned in Syria.
1KI 11:26 Also Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, of Ephraim of Zereda, the servant of Solomon, of which Jeroboam, a woman widow, Zeruah by name, was his mother, he also raised his hand against the king.
1KI 11:27 And this was [[the]] cause of his rebelty against the king; for Solomon builded the Millo, and made even the swallow of the city of David, his father.
1KI 11:28 Forsooth Jeroboam was a mighty man and strong; and Solomon saw the young waxing man to be of good kindred, and witting in things to be done, and Solomon made him prefect, either sovereign, upon the tributes of all the house of Joseph.
1KI 11:29 Therefore it was done in that time, that Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem; and Ahijah of Shiloh, a prophet, covered with a new mantle, found him in the way; and they twain [[or two]] were alone in the field.
1KI 11:30 And Ahijah took his new mantle, with which he was covered, and he cut it into twelve parts;
1KI 11:31 and said to Jeroboam, Take to thee ten cuttings of the mantle; for the Lord God of Israel saith these things, Lo! I shall cut the realm from the hand of Solomon, and I shall give to thee ten lineages;
1KI 11:32 but one lineage shall dwell to him, for David, my servant, and for Jerusalem, the city which I chose of all the lineages of Israel;
1KI 11:33 this cutting of the realm shall be; for Solomon forsook me, and worship-ped Astarte, the goddess of Sidonians, and Chemosh, the god of Moab, and Moloch, the god of the sons of Ammon; and [[he]] went not in my ways, that he did rightwiseness before me, and my behests, and my dooms, as David, his father, did.
1KI 11:34 And I shall not take away all the realm from his hand, but I shall put him duke in all the days of his life, for David, my servant, whom I chose, which kept my behests, and my commandments.
1KI 11:35 Soothly I shall take away the realm from the hand of his son, and I shall give [[the]] ten lineages to thee;
1KI 11:36 forsooth I shall give one lineage to his son, that a lantern dwell to David, my servant, in all days before me in Jerusalem, the city which I chose, that my name should be there.
1KI 11:37 Forsooth I shall take thee, and thou shalt reign on all things which thy soul desireth, and thou shalt be king upon Israel.
1KI 11:38 Therefore if thou shalt hear all things which I shall command to thee, and if thou shalt go in my ways, and if thou shalt do that, that is rightful [[or right]] before me, and if thou shalt keep my commandments, and my behests, as David, my servant, did, I shall be with thee, and I shall build a faithful house to thee, as I builded an house to David, and I shall give Israel to thee;
1KI 11:39 and I shall torment the seed of David on this thing, nevertheless not in all days.
1KI 11:40 Therefore Solomon would slay Jeroboam, which rose, and fled into Egypt, to Shishak, king of Egypt; and he was in Egypt unto the death of Solomon.
1KI 11:41 Forsooth the residue of the words of Solomon, and all things which he did, and his wisdom, lo! all those things be written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of Solomon.
1KI 11:42 And the days in which Solomon reigned in Jerusalem upon all Israel, be forty years.
1KI 11:43 And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David, his father; and Rehoboam, his son, reigned for him.
1KI 12:1 Forsooth Rehoboam came into Shechem; for all Israel was gathered thither to make him king.
1KI 12:2 And soothly Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, when he was yet in Egypt, and fled from the face of king Solomon, turned again from Egypt, for the death of Solomon was heard;
1KI 12:3 and they sent, and called him. Therefore Jeroboam came, and all the multitude of Israel, and they spake to Rehoboam, and said,
1KI 12:4 Thy father putted the most hard yoke upon us, therefore abate thou a little now of the hardest commandment of thy father, and of the full grievous yoke that he hath put upon us, and we shall serve to thee.
1KI 12:5 And Rehoboam said to them, Go ye till to the third day, and turn ye again to me. And when the people had gone,
1KI 12:6 king Rehoboam took counsel with the elder men, that stood before Solomon, his father, while he lived yet; and Rehoboam said, What counsel give ye to me, that I answer to the people?
1KI 12:7 Which said to him, If thou obeyest today to this people, and servest this people, and givest stead to their asking, and speakest to them light, or easy, words, they shall be servants to thee in all days.
1KI 12:8 And Rehoboam forsook the counsel of [[the]] eld [[or old]] men, which they gave to him, and took young men, that were nourished with him, and stood nigh [[to]] him;
1KI 12:9 and he said to them, What counsel give ye to me, that I answer to this people, that said to me, Make thou easier the yoke that thy father hath put upon us?
1KI 12:10 And the young men, that were nourished with him, said to him, Thus speak thou to this people, that spake to thee, and said, Thy father made grievous our yoke, relieve thou us; thus thou shalt speak to them, My least finger is greater than the back of my father;
1KI 12:11 and now though my father putted [[or put]] on you a grievous yoke, forsooth I shall add on your yoke; my father beat you with scourges, but I shall beat you with scorpions.
1KI 12:12 Therefore Jeroboam, and all the people, came to Rehoboam, in the third day, as the king spake, saying, Turn ye again to me in the third day.
1KI 12:13 And the king answered hard things to the people, while the counsel of [[the]] elder men was forsaken, that they had given to him;
1KI 12:14 and he spake to them by the counsel of [[the]] young men, and said, My father made grievous your yoke, forsooth I shall add to your yoke; my father beat you with scourges, but I shall beat you with scorpions.
1KI 12:15 And the king assented not to the people, for the Lord had turned him away, that the Lord should raise up his word, that he had spoken in the hand of the prophet Ahijah of Shiloh to Jeroboam, the son of Nebat.
1KI 12:16 Then the people saw, that the king would not hear them, and the people answered to the king, and said, What part is to us in David, either what heritage in the son of Jesse? Israel, turn thou again into thy tabernacles; now, David, see thou to thine house. And Israel went into his tabernacles.
1KI 12:17 Forsooth Rehoboam reigned on the sons of Israel, which dwelled in the cities of Judah.
1KI 12:18 Therefore king Rehoboam sent Adoram, that was on the tributes; and all the people of Israel stoned him, and he was dead. Forsooth king Rehoboam went up hastily upon his chariot, and fled into Jerusalem;
1KI 12:19 and Israel departed from the house of David, till into this present day.
1KI 12:20 Forsooth it was done, when all Israel had heard that Jeroboam [[was]] turned again, they sent, and called him, when the company was gathered together, and they made him king upon all Israel; and no man followed the house of David, except the lineage alone of Judah.
1KI 12:21 And Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, and gathered together all the house of Judah, and the lineage of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore thousand of chosen men and warriors, that they should fight against the house of Israel, and should bring again the realm to Rehoboam, the son of Solomon.
1KI 12:22 Forsooth the word of God was made to Shemaiah, the man of God, and said,
1KI 12:23 Speak thou to Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all the house of Judah and of Benjamin, and to the residue of the people, and say thou,
1KI 12:24 The Lord saith these things, Ye shall not go up, neither ye shall fight against your brethren, the sons of Israel; turn each man again into his house, for this word is done of me. They heard the word of the Lord, and they turned again from the journey, as the Lord commanded to them.
1KI 12:25 And Jeroboam builded Shechem, in the hill of Ephraim, and dwelled there; and he went out from thence, and builded Penuel.
1KI 12:26 And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now the realm shall turn again to the house of David,
1KI 12:27 if this people ascendeth [[or go up]] to Jerusalem, that it make sacrifice in the house of the Lord in Jerusalem; and then the heart of this people shall turn again to their lord, Rehoboam, king of Judah; and they shall slay me, and shall turn again to him.
1KI 12:28 And by counsel thought out, Jeroboam made twain [[or two]] golden calves, and he said to the people, Do not ye ascend [[or go up]] more into Jerusalem; Israel, lo! thy gods, that led thee out of the land of Egypt.
1KI 12:29 And he set one calf in Bethel, and the tother in Dan.
1KI 12:30 And this word was made to Israel into sin; for the people went into Dan, to worship the calf.
1KI 12:31 And Jeroboam made temples in high places, and he made priests of the last men of the people, the which were not of the sons of Levi.
1KI 12:32 And the king ordained a solemn day in the eighth month, in the fifteen day of the month, by [[the]] likeness of the solemnity that was hallowed in Judah. And the king went up, and made in like manner an altar in Bethel, that he should offer to the calves, which he had made; and he ordained in Bethel priests of the high places, which he had made.
1KI 12:33 And he went up upon the altar, which he had builded in Bethel, in the fifteenth day of the eighth month, which he had feigned of his heart; and he made a solemnity to the sons of Israel, and he went upon the altar, that he should burn incense.
1KI 13:1 And lo! a man of God came from Judah, by the word of the Lord, into Bethel, while Jeroboam stood upon the altar, casting incense.
1KI 13:2 And he cried out against the altar, by the word of the Lord, and said, Altar! altar! the Lord saith these things, Lo! a son, Josiah by name, shall be born to the house of David; and he shall offer upon thee the priests of high things, the which burn now incense in thee, and he shall burn the bones of men upon thee.
1KI 13:3 And he gave a sign in that day, and said, This shall be the sign that the Lord spake, Lo! the altar shall be cut, and the ash which is therein, shall be shed out.
1KI 13:4 And when the king had heard the word of the man of God, which he had cried against the altar in Bethel, the king held forth his hand from the altar, and said, Take ye him. And his hand dried up, which he had held forth, and he might not draw it again to himself.
1KI 13:5 Also the altar was cut, and the ash was shed out of the altar, by the sign which the man of God before-said, in the word of the Lord.
1KI 13:6 And the king said to the man of God, Beseech thou before the face of the Lord thy God, and pray thou for me, that mine hand be restored to me. And the man of God prayed before the face of the Lord; and the hand of the king turned again to him, and it was made as it was before.
1KI 13:7 And the king spake to the man of God, Come thou home with me, that thou eat, and I shall give gifts to thee.
1KI 13:8 And the man of God said to the king, Though thou shalt give to me the half part of thine house, I shall not come with thee, neither I shall eat bread, neither I shall drink water in this place.
1KI 13:9 for so it was commanded to me by the word of the Lord, commanding, Thou shalt not eat bread, neither thou shalt drink water, neither thou shalt turn again by the way by which thou camest.
1KI 13:10 Therefore he went by another way, and turned not again by the way, by which he came into Bethel.
1KI 13:11 Forsooth an eld [[or old]] prophet dwelled then in Bethel, to whom his sons came, and told to him all the works which the man of God had done in that day in Bethel; and they [[also]] told to their father the words which he spake to the king.
1KI 13:12 And the father of them said to them, By what way went he? His sons showed to him the way, by which the man of God went, that came from Judah.
1KI 13:13 And he said to his sons, Saddle ye an ass to me. And when they had saddled the ass, he ascended or went up,
1KI 13:14 and went after the man of God, and found him sitting under a terebinth. And he said to the man of God, Whether thou art the man of God, that camest from Judah? He answered, I am.
1KI 13:15 And he said to him, Come thou with me home, that thou eat bread.
1KI 13:16 And he said, I may not turn again, neither come with thee, neither I shall eat bread, neither I shall drink water in this place;
1KI 13:17 for the Lord spake to me in the word of the Lord, and said, Thou shalt not eat bread, and thou shalt not drink water there, neither thou shalt turn again by the way by which thou wentest thither.
1KI 13:18 And he said to him, And I am a prophet like thee; and an angel spake to me by the word of the Lord, and said, Lead again him into thine house, that he eat bread, and drink water. He deceived the man of God,
1KI 13:19 and brought him again with him. Therefore he ate bread in his house, and drank water.
1KI 13:20 And when he sat at the table, the word of the Lord was made to the prophet that brought him again;
1KI 13:21 and he cried [[out]] to the man of God that came from Judah, and said, The Lord saith these things, For thou obeyedest not to the mouth of the Lord, and keptest not the command-ment which thy Lord God commanded to thee,
1KI 13:22 and thou turnedest again, and atest bread, and drankest water in the place in which I commanded to thee, that thou shouldest not eat bread, neither shouldest drink water, thy dead body shall not be borne into the sepulchre of thy fathers.
1KI 13:23 And when he had eaten and drunk, the prophet, whom he had brought again, saddled his ass.
1KI 13:24 And when he had gone forth, a lion found him in the way, and killed him. And his dead body was cast forth in the way; soothly the ass stood beside him, and the lion also stood beside the dead body.
1KI 13:25 And lo! men passing saw the dead body cast forth in the way, and the lion standing beside the dead body; and they came, and published it in the city, in which the eld [[or old]] prophet dwelled.
1KI 13:26 And when that prophet, that brought him again from the way, had heard this, he said, It is the man of God, that was unobedient to the mouth of God; and the Lord betook him to the lion, that hath broken him, and killed him, by the word of the Lord which he spake to him.
1KI 13:27 And he said to his sons, Saddle ye an ass to me. And when they had saddled,
1KI 13:28 and he had gone, he found his dead body cast forth in the way, and the ass and the lion standing beside the dead body; and the lion ate not the dead body, neither hurted the ass.
1KI 13:29 Therefore the prophet took the dead body of the man of God, and put it on the ass; and he turned again, and brought it into the city of the eld [[or old]] prophet, that he should bewail him.
1KI 13:30 And he put his dead body in his sepulchre, and they bewailed him, and said, Alas! alas! my brother!
1KI 13:31 And when they had bewailed him, he said to his sons, When I shall be dead, bury me in the sepulchre, in which the man of God is buried; put ye my bones beside his bones.
1KI 13:32 For soothly the word shall come, which he before-said in the word of the Lord, against the altar that is in Bethel, and against all the temples of [[the]] high places, which be in the cities of Samaria.
1KI 13:33 After these words Jeroboam turned not again from his worst way, but on the contrary, of the last of the people he made priests of high places; who-ever would, [[he]] fulfilled his hand, and he was made [[a]] priest of high places.
1KI 13:34 And for this cause the house of Jeroboam sinned, and it was destroyed, and done away from the face of the earth.
1KI 14:1 In that time Abijah, son of Jeroboam, was sick.
1KI 14:2 And Jeroboam said to his wife, Rise thou up, and change clothing, that thou be not known, that thou art the wife of Jeroboam; and go thou into Shiloh, where Ahijah, the prophet, is, which spake to me, that I should reign upon this people.
1KI 14:3 Also take thou in thine hand ten loaves, and a cake, and a vessel of honey, and go thou to him; for he shall show to thee, what shall befall to this child.
1KI 14:4 The wife of Jeroboam did as he said, and she rose up, and went into Shiloh, and came into the house of Ahijah; and Ahijah might not see, for his eyes dimmed for eld age.
1KI 14:5 Forsooth the Lord said to Ahijah, Lo! the wife of Jeroboam entereth, that she counsel with thee on her son, which is sick; thou shalt speak these and these things to her. Therefore when she had entered, and had feigned herself to be that which she was not,
1KI 14:6 Ahijah heard the sound of the feet of her entering by the door, and he said, Enter thou, the wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou thee to be another? Forsooth I am sent to be an hard messenger, that is, telling hard things, to thee.
1KI 14:7 Go thou, and say to Jeroboam, The Lord God of Israel saith these things, For I enhanced thee from the midst of the people, and I gave thee to be duke on my people Israel,
1KI 14:8 and I cutted the realm of the house of David, and I gave it to thee, and thou were not as my servant David, that kept my behests, and pursued [[or followed]] me in all his heart, and did that that was pleasant [[or pleasing]] in my sight;
1KI 14:9 but thou hast wrought evil, over all men that were before thee, and madest to thee alien gods, and welled those together, that thou shouldest excite me or stir me to wrathfulness, soothly thou hast cast forth me behind thy back.
1KI 14:10 Therefore lo! I shall bring in evils upon the house of Jeroboam, and I shall smite the house of Jeroboam unto a pisser to the wall, and unto him that is imprisoned, and the last in Israel; and I shall cleanse the relics, or remnants, of the house of Jeroboam, as dung is wont to be cleansed unto purity, either cleanness;
1KI 14:11 soothly dogs shall eat them, that shall die of the house of Jeroboam in the city; and birds of the air shall devour them, that shall die in the field; for the Lord spake.
1KI 14:12 Therefore rise thou, and go into thine house; and in that entering of thy feet into the city, the child shall die.
1KI 14:13 And all Israel shall bewail him, and shall bury him; for this child alone of Jeroboam shall be borne into the sepulchre, for a good word is found on him of the Lord God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam.
1KI 14:14 Forsooth the Lord shall ordain to him a king upon Israel, that shall smite the house of Jeroboam, in this day, and in this time, that is, of nigh;
1KI 14:15 and the Lord God of Israel shall smite, as a reed in the water is wont to be moved; and he shall draw out Israel from this good land, which he gave to their fathers, and he shall winnow them over the flood, for they made to them maumet woods, that they should stir the Lord to ire.
1KI 14:16 And the Lord God shall betake Israel to his enemies, for the sins of Jeroboam, that sinned, and made Israel to do sin.
1KI 14:17 Therefore the wife of Jeroboam rose, and went, and came into Tirzah; and when she entered into the thresh-old of the house, the child was dead.
1KI 14:18 And they buried him; and all Israel bewailed him, by the word of the Lord, which he spake in the hand of his servant, Ahijah the prophet.
1KI 14:19 Forsooth, lo! the residue of the words of Jeroboam, how he fought, and how he reigned, be written in the book of [[the]] words of the days of [[the]] kings of Israel.
1KI 14:20 Forsooth the days, in which Jeroboam reigned, be two and twenty years; and Jeroboam slept with his fathers, and Nadab, his son, reigned for him.
1KI 14:21 Forsooth Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, reigned in Judah; Rehoboam was of one and forty years, when he began to reign, and he reigned seven-teen years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord chose of all the lineages of Israel, that he should set [[or put]] his name there. And the name of his mother was Naamah the Ammonite.
1KI 14:22 And Judah did evil before the Lord, and they stirred him to ire on all things, which their fathers did in their sins, by which they sinned.
1KI 14:23 For also they builded to them-selves altars, and images, and woods, on each high hill, and under each tree full of boughs.
1KI 14:24 But also men of women’s condi-tions or womanish men were in the land, and they did all the abomin-ations of heathen men, which the Lord all-brake before the face of the sons of Israel.
1KI 14:25 Forsooth in the fifth year of the realm of Rehoboam, Shishak, the king of Egypt, went up into Jerusalem;
1KI 14:26 and he took the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the king’s treasures, and he ravished all things; also he ravished the golden shields which Solomon made.
1KI 14:27 For which king Rehoboam made brazen shields, and gave those [[or them]] into the hands of [[the]] dukes of shield-makers, and of them that waked [[or watched]] before the door of the house of the king.
1KI 14:28 And when the king entered into the house of the Lord, they that had office to go before, bare those [[or them]], and they bare those again to the place of arms [[or the armory place]] of [[the]] shield-makers.
1KI 14:29 Forsooth, lo! the residue of the words of Rehoboam, and all things which he did, be written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of [[the]] kings of Judah.
1KI 14:30 And battle was betwixt Rehoboam and Jeroboam, in all days.
1KI 14:31 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in the city of David. And the name of his mother was Naamah the Ammonite; and Abijam, his son, reigned for him.
1KI 15:1 Therefore in the eighteenth year of the realm of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, Abijam reigned upon Judah.
1KI 15:2 Three years he reigned in Jerusalem; the name of his mother was Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.
1KI 15:3 And he went in all the sins of his father, which he did before him; and his heart was not perfect with his Lord God, as the heart of David, his father, was perfect.
1KI 15:4 But for David, his Lord God gave to him a lantern in Jerusalem, that he should raise his son after him, and that he should stand in Jerusalem;
1KI 15:5 for David had done rightfulness [[or right]] in the eyes of the Lord, and had not bowed [[away]] from all things that the Lord had commanded to him, in all the days of his life, except the word of Uriah the Hittite.
1KI 15:6 Nevertheless battle was betwixt Abijam and Jeroboam, in all the time of his life.
1KI 15:7 Soothly the residue of the words of Abijam, and all things that he did, whether these be not written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of the kings of Judah? And battle was betwixt Abijam and Jeroboam.
1KI 15:8 And Abijam slept with his fathers; and they buried him in the city of David; and Asa, his son, reigned for him.
1KI 15:9 And Asa, king of Judah, reigned in the twentieth year of Jeroboam, king of Israel;
1KI 15:10 and Asa reigned one and forty years in Jerusalem. The name of his grandmother was Maachah, the daugh-ter of Abishalom.
1KI 15:11 And Asa did rightfulness [[or right]] in the sight of the Lord, as David, his father, did;
1KI 15:12 and he took away from the land men of women’s conditions [[or the womanish-made men]], and he purged all the filths of idols, which his fathers made.
1KI 15:13 Furthermore and he removed Maachah, his grandmother, that she should not be princess in the solemn things of the idol Priapus, and in his maumet woods that she had hallow-ed; and he destroyed the den of him, and he brake the foulest simulacrum, and burnt it in the strand [[or stream]] of Kidron;
1KI 15:14 soothly he did not away the high things; nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect with his Lord God, in all his days.
1KI 15:15 And he brought into the house of the Lord those things, which his father had hallowed, and avowed [[or vowed]], silver, and gold, and vessels.
1KI 15:16 Forsooth battle was betwixt Asa and Baasha, king of Israel, in all the days of them.
1KI 15:17 And Baasha, king of Israel, went up into Judah, and builded Ramah, that no man of the part of Asa, king of Judah, might go out, either go in.
1KI 15:18 Therefore Asa took all the silver and gold, that were left in the treasuries of the house of the Lord, and in the treasuries of the king’s house, and gave it into the hands of his servants; and he sent it to Benhadad, the son of Tab-rimon, son of Hezion, the king of Syria, that dwelled in Damascus, and said,
1KI 15:19 A bond of peace is betwixt me and thee, and betwixt my father and thy father, and therefore I sent to thee gifts, gold, and silver; and I ask, that thou come, and make void the bond of peace, that thou hast with Baasha, king of Israel, and that he go away from me.
1KI 15:20 Benhadad assented to king Asa, and sent the princes of his host into the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel, the house of Maachah or Abelbethmaachah, and all Cinneroth, that is, all the land of Naphtali.
1KI 15:21 And when Baasha had heard this thing, he left off to build Ramah, and turned again into Tirzah.
1KI 15:22 Forsooth king Asa sent [[a]] message into all Judah, and said, No man be excused. And they took away the stones of Ramah, and the trees thereof, by which Baasha had builded; and king Asa builded of the same stones and trees Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.
1KI 15:23 Soothly the residue of all the words of Asa, and of all his strength, and all things that he did, and the cities which he builded, whether these be not written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of [[the]] kings of Judah? Nevertheless Asa had ache in his feet, in the time of his eld age.
1KI 15:24 And Asa slept with his fathers, and he was buried with them in the city of David, his father; and Jehosh-aphat, his son, reigned for him.
1KI 15:25 Forsooth Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, reigned on Israel, in the second year of Asa, king of Judah; and he reigned on Israel two years.
1KI 15:26 And he did that, that was evil in the sight of the Lord, and he went in the ways of his father, and in the sins of him, in which he made Israel to do sin.
1KI 15:27 And Baasha, the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, setted treason to him, and he smote him in Gibbe-thon, which is a city of Philistines; and Nadab and all Israel besieged Gibbethon.
1KI 15:28 Therefore Baasha killed him, in the third year of Asa, king of Judah, and reigned for him.
1KI 15:29 And when he had reigned, he smote all the house of Jeroboam; he left not one man of his seed, till he did away him, by the word of the Lord, which he spake in the hand of his servant, Ahijah of Shiloh, a prophet,
1KI 15:30 for the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned, and in which he made Israel to do sin, and for the trespass, by which he wrathed the Lord God of Israel.
1KI 15:31 Soothly the residue of the words of Nadab, and all things which he wrought, whether these be not written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of the kings of Israel?
1KI 15:32 And battle was betwixt Asa and Baasha, king of Israel, in all the days of them.
1KI 15:33 In the third year of Asa, king of Judah, Baasha, the son of Ahijah, reigned upon all Israel, in Tirzah, four and twenty years.
1KI 15:34 And he did evil before the Lord, and he went in the ways of Jeroboam, and in his sins, by which he made Israel to do sin.
1KI 16:1 Forsooth the word of the Lord was made to Jehu, the son of Hanani, against Baasha, and said,
1KI 16:2 For that that I raised thee from dust, and setted [[or set]] thee duke on Israel, my people; soothly thou wentest in the way of Jeroboam, and thou hast made my people Israel to do sin, that thou shouldest stir me to ire, in the sins of them;
1KI 16:3 lo! I shall cut away the hinder things of Baasha, and the hinder things of his house, and I shall make thine house as the house of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat.
1KI 16:4 Dogs shall eat that man of Baasha, that shall be dead in the city, and [[the]] birds of the air shall eat that man of Baasha, that shall die in the field.
1KI 16:5 Soothly the residue of the words of Baasha, and whatever things he did, and his battles, whether these be not written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of the kings of Israel?
1KI 16:6 And so Baasha slept with his fathers, and he was buried in Tirzah; and Elah, his son, reigned for him.
1KI 16:7 Forsooth when the word of the Lord was made in the hand of Jehu, the son of Hanani, against Baasha, and against his house, and against all the evil which he did before the Lord, to stir him to ire in the works of his hands, that he should be as the house of Jeroboam, for this cause he killed him.
1KI 16:8 In the six and twentieth year of Asa, king of Judah, Elah, the son of Baasha, reigned upon Israel, in Tirzah, two years.
1KI 16:9 And Zimri, his servant, duke of the half part of his knights, rebelled against him; soothly Elah was in Tirzah, and drank and was drunken in the house of Arza, prefect of Tirzah.
1KI 16:10 Therefore Zimri felled in, and smote Elah, and killed him, in the seven and twentieth year of Asa, king of Judah; and [[he]] reigned for him.
1KI 16:11 And when he had reigned, and sat upon his throne, he smote all the house of Baasha, and he left not thereof a pisser to the wall, and his kinsmen, and friends.
1KI 16:12 And Zimri did away all the house of Baasha, by the word of the Lord, which he spake to Baasha, in the hand of Jehu, the prophet,
1KI 16:13 for all the sins of Baasha, and for the sins of Elah, his son, which sinned, and made Israel to do sin, and wrathed the Lord God of Israel in their vanities.
1KI 16:14 Soothly the residue of the words of Elah, and all things which he did, whether these be not written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of the kings of Israel?
1KI 16:15 In the seven and twentieth year of Asa, king of Judah, Zimri reigned seven days in Tirzah; forsooth the host of Israel besieged Gibbethon, the city of Philistines.
1KI 16:16 And when it had heard, that Zimri had rebelled, and had slain the king, all Israel made Omri king to them, that was prince of the chivalry, on Israel, in that day, in their tents.
1KI 16:17 Therefore Omri went up, and all Israel with him, from Gibbethon, and besieged Tirzah.
1KI 16:18 And Zimri saw, that the city should be overcome, and he entered into the palace, and burnt himself with the king’s house; and he was dead
1KI 16:19 in his sins which he sinned, doing evil before the Lord, and going in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sins, by which he made Israel to do sin.
1KI 16:20 Soothly the residue of the words of Zimri, and of his treasons, and tyranny, whether these be not written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of the kings of Israel?
1KI 16:21 Then the people of Israel was parted into two parts; the half part of the people followed Tibni, the son of Ginath, to make him king, and the other half part followed Omri.
1KI 16:22 And the people that was with Omri, had the mastery over the people that followed Tibni, the son of Ginath; and Tibni was dead, and Omri reigned.
1KI 16:23 In the one and thirtieth year of Asa, king of Judah, Omri reigned upon Israel, twelve years; in Tirzah, he reigned six years.
1KI 16:24 And he bought of Shemer, for two talents of silver, the hill of Samaria, and builded on that hill; and he called the name of the city, which he had builded, by the name of Shemer, [[the]] lord of the hill of Samaria.
1KI 16:25 Forsooth Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord, and wrought waywardly, or wickedly, over all men that were before him.
1KI 16:26 And he went in all the way of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, and in his sins, by which he made Israel to do sin, that he should stir to ire, in his vanities, the Lord God of Israel.
1KI 16:27 Forsooth the residue of the words of Omri, and his battles, which he did, whether these be not written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of the kings of Israel?
1KI 16:28 And Omri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria; and Ahab, his son, reigned for him.
1KI 16:29 Forsooth Ahab, the son of Omri, reigned upon Israel, in the eight and thirtieth year of Asa, king of Judah; and Ahab, the son of Omri, reigned upon Israel, in Samaria, two and twenty years.
1KI 16:30 And Ahab, the son of Omri, did evil in the sight of the Lord, over all men that were before him;
1KI 16:31 and it sufficed not to him that he went in the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, furthermore and he wedded a wife, Jezebel, the daughter of Ethbaal, king of Sidonians; and he went and served Baal, and worshipped him.
1KI 16:32 And he set up an altar to Baal in the temple of Baal, which he had builded in Samaria,
1KI 16:33 and he planted a maumet woods; and Ahab added to that in his work, and stirred to ire the Lord God of Israel, more than all [[the]] kings of Israel that were before him.
1KI 16:34 Forsooth in his days Hiel of Bethel builded Jericho; in Abiram, his first son, he founded it, and in Segub, his last son, he setted [[or set]] the gates thereof, by the word of the Lord, which he had spoken in the hand of Joshua, the son of Nun.
1KI 17:1 And Elijah the Tishbite, of the dwellers of Gilead, said to Ahab, The Lord God of Israel liveth, in whose sight I stand, dew and rain shall not be in these years, no but by the words of my mouth.
1KI 17:2 And the word of the Lord was made to him, and said,
1KI 17:3 Go thou away from hence, and go against the east, and be thou hid in the strand [[or stream]] of Cherith, that is against Jordan,
1KI 17:4 and there thou shalt drink of the strand; and I have commanded to [[the]] crows, that they feed thee there.
1KI 17:5 Therefore he went, and did by the word of the Lord; and when he had gone, he sat in the strand [[or stream]] of Cherith, that is against Jordan.
1KI 17:6 And [[the]] crows bare to him bread and flesh early; and in like manner in the eventide; and he drank of the strand [[or stream]].
1KI 17:7 And after some days the strand was dried; for it had not rained on the earth.
1KI 17:8 Therefore the word of the Lord was made to him, and said,
1KI 17:9 Rise thou, and go into Zarephath of Sidonians, and thou shalt dwell there; for I have commanded to a woman widow there, that she feed thee.
1KI 17:10 He rose, and went into Zarephath of Sidonians; and when he had come to the gate of the city, a woman widow gathering sticks appeared to him; and he called her, and said to her, Give thou to me a little of water in a vessel, that I drink.
1KI 17:11 And when she went to bring it, he cried behind her back, and said, I beseech, bring thou to me also a morsel of bread in thine hand.
1KI 17:12 And she answered, Thy Lord God liveth, for I have no bread, no but as much of meal in a pot, as a fist[[ful]] may take, and a little of oil in a vessel; lo! I gather two sticks, that I enter, and make it to me, and to my son, that we eat, and die.
1KI 17:13 And Elijah said to her, Do not thou dread, but go, and make as thou saidest; nevertheless make thou first to me of that little meal a little loaf, baked under ashes, and bring thou it to me; soothly thou shalt make after-ward to thee and to thy son.
1KI 17:14 Forsooth the Lord God of Israel saith these things, The pot of meal shall not fail, and the vessel of oil shall not be abated, till to the day in which the Lord shall give rain on the face of the earth.
1KI 17:15 And she went, and did by the word of Elijah; and he ate, and she, and her house.
1KI 17:16 And from that day the pot of meal failed not, and the vessel of oil was not abated, by the word of the Lord, which he had spoken in the hand of Elijah.
1KI 17:17 Forsooth it was done after these words, the son of a woman house-wife, was sick, and the sickness was full strong, so that breath dwelled not in him.
1KI 17:18 Therefore she said to Elijah, What to me and to thee, thou man of God? Enteredest thou to me, that my wicked-ness should be remembered, and that thou shouldest slay my son?
1KI 17:19 And Elijah said to her, Give thy son to me. And he took that son from her bosom, and bare into the solar, where he dwelled; and he put him on his bed.
1KI 17:20 And he cried to the Lord, and said, My Lord God, whether thou hast tormented also the widow, with whom I am sustained in all manner, that thou killedest her son?
1KI 17:21 He spread abroad himself, and was meted [[or measured]] upon the child by three times; and he cried to the Lord, and said, My Lord God, I beseech, the soul of this child turn again into the entrails of him.
1KI 17:22 The Lord heard the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child turned again within him, and he lived again.
1KI 17:23 And Elijah took the child, and put him down of the solar into the lower house, and betook him to his mother; and he said to her, Lo! thy son liveth.
1KI 17:24 And the woman said to Elijah, Now in this I have known, that thou art a man of God, and the word of the Lord is sooth in thy mouth.
1KI 18:1 After many days the word of the Lord was made to Elijah, in the third year, and said, Go, and show thee to Ahab, that I give rain upon the face of the earth.
1KI 18:2 Therefore Elijah went to show him-self to Ahab; forsooth a great hunger was made in Samaria.
1KI 18:3 And Ahab called Obadiah, the dispenser, either steward, of his house; forsooth Obadiah dreaded greatly the Lord God of Israel.
1KI 18:4 For when Jezebel killed the prophets of the Lord, he took an hundred prophets, and hid them, by fifties and fifties, in dens, and fed them with bread and water.
1KI 18:5 Then Ahab said to Obadiah, Go thou into the land, to all the wells of waters, and into all valleys, if in hap we may find grass, and save horses and mules; and [[the]] work beasts perish not utterly.
1KI 18:6 And they parted the countries to themselves, that they should compass those [[or them]]; Ahab went by one way, and Obadiah went by another way, by himself.
1KI 18:7 And when Obadiah was in the way, Elijah met him; and when he had known Elijah, he felled on his face, and said, Whether thou art my lord Elijah?
1KI 18:8 To whom he answered, I am. And Elijah said, Go thou, and say to thy lord, Elijah is present.
1KI 18:9 And Obadiah said, What have I sinned, for thou betakest me in the hand of Ahab, that he slay me?
1KI 18:10 Thy Lord God liveth, for no folk either realm is, whither my lord, seeking thee, sent not; and when all men answered, He is not here, he charged greatly all realms and folks, for thou were not found;
1KI 18:11 and now thou sayest to me, Go, and say to thy lord, Elijah is present.
1KI 18:12 And when I shall depart from thee, the Spirit of the Lord shall bear thee away into a place which I know not; and I shall enter, and tell to Ahab, and he shall not find thee, and he shall slay thee; forsooth thy servant dreadeth the Lord from his young childhood.
1KI 18:13 Whether it is not showed to thee, my lord, what I did, when Jezebel killed the prophets of the Lord, that I hid of the prophets of the Lord an hundred men, by fifty and fifty, in dens, and I fed them with bread and water?
1KI 18:14 And now thou sayest, Go, and say to thy lord, Elijah is present or is nigh, that he slay me.
1KI 18:15 And Elijah said, The Lord of hosts liveth, before whose sight I stand, for today I shall appear to him.
1KI 18:16 Therefore Obadiah went into the meeting of Ahab, and showed it to him; and Ahab came into the meeting of Elijah.
1KI 18:17 And when he had seen Elijah, he said, Whether thou art he, that troublest Israel?
1KI 18:18 And he said, Not I trouble Israel, but thou, and the house of thy father, which have forsaken the command-ments of the Lord, and pursued [[or followed]] Baalim.
1KI 18:19 Nevertheless now send thou, and gather to me all Israel, into the hill of Carmel, and the four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal, and [[the]] four hundred prophets of maumet woods, that eat of the table of Jezebel.
1KI 18:20 Ahab sent to all the sons of Israel, and gathered together the prophets in the hill of Carmel.
1KI 18:21 Forsooth Elijah nighed to all the people of Israel, and said, How long halt ye into two parts? If the Lord is God, pursue ye [[or followeth]] him; and if Baal is God, pursue ye [[or followeth]] him. And the people answered not one word to him.
1KI 18:22 And Elijah said again to the people, I dwelled alone a prophet of the Lord; soothly the prophets of Baal be four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the maumet woods be four hundred men.
1KI 18:23 Twain oxes [[or two oxen]] be given to us; and choose they one ox, and they shall cut it into gobbets, and put it on wood, but put they not fire under; and I shall make ready the tother ox into sacrifice, and I shall put it on the wood, and I shall not put fire under it either.
1KI 18:24 Call ye the name of your gods, and I shall call the name of my God; and the God that heareth by fire falling down, given from heaven to waste the sacrifice, be he God. And all the people answered, and said, The reason is best, that Elijah hath spoken.
1KI 18:25 Therefore Elijah said to the prophets of Baal, Choose ye one ox to you, and make ye ready first your sacrifice, for ye be the more; and call ye the names of your gods, and put ye not fire under.
1KI 18:26 And when they had taken the ox, whom [[or that]] Elijah gave to them, they made ready the sacrifice, and called the name of Baal, from the morrowtide till to midday, and said, Baal, hear us! And no voice was, neither any that answered; and they skipped over the altar, which they had made.
1KI 18:27 And when it was then midday, Elijah scorned them, and said, Cry ye with [[a]] greater voice, for Baal is your god, and in hap he speaketh with another, either he is in a harbourgerie, either in the way, either certainly he sleepeth, that he be raised up.
1KI 18:28 Therefore they cried with [[a]] greater voice, and they cut themselves with knives and lancets, after their custom, till they were beshed with blood.
1KI 18:29 But after that midday passed, and while they prophesied, or prayed, the time came, in which the sacrifice is wont to be offered, neither voice was heard of their gods, neither any answered, neither perceived them praying.
1KI 18:30 [[And]] Elijah said to all the people, Come ye to me. And when the people came to him, he arrayed the altar of the Lord, that was destroyed.
1KI 18:31 And he took twelve stones, by the number of the lineages of the sons of Jacob, to which Jacob the word of the Lord was made, and said, Israel shall be thy name.
1KI 18:32 And he builded an altar of stones, in the name of the Lord, and he made a leading-to of water, either a ditch, as by two little ditches, or furrows, in the compass of the altar.
1KI 18:33 And he dressed [[the]] wood, and he parted the ox by its members, and put it upon the wood, and said, Fill ye four pots with water, and pour ye it upon the burnt sacrifice, and upon the wood.
1KI 18:34 And again he said, Also the second time do ye this. And they did it the second time. And he said, Do ye the same thing the third time; and they did it the third time.
1KI 18:35 And the waters ran about the altar, and the ditch, or rut, of [[the]] leading-to of water was filled.
1KI 18:36 And when the time was then, that the burnt sacrifice should be offered, Elijah the prophet nighed, and said, Lord God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, show thou today that thou art God of Israel, and that I am thy servant, and have done all these words by thy commandment.
1KI 18:37 Lord, hear thou me; Lord, hear thou me; that this people learn, that thou art the Lord God, and that thou hast converted again the heart of them.
1KI 18:38 Soothly [[the]] fire of the Lord felled down then, and devoured the burnt sacrifice, the wood, and the stones, and it licked up also the powder, and the water that was in the leading-to, or the rut, of water.
1KI 18:39 And when all the people had seen this, the people felled into his face, and said, The Lord, he is God; the Lord, he is God.
1KI 18:40 And Elijah said to them, Take ye the prophets of Baal; not one soothly escape of them. And when they had taken them, Elijah led them to the strand [[or stream]] of Kishon, and killed them there.
1KI 18:41 And Elijah said to Ahab, Go thou up, and eat, and drink, for the sound of much rain is nigh.
1KI 18:42 Ahab went up to eat and drink; but Elijah went up into the top of the hill of Carmel, and he set lowly his face to the earth, betwixt his knees;
1KI 18:43 and said to his servant, Go thou up, and behold thou against the sea. And when he had gone up, and beheld, he said, Nothing is there. And again Elijah said to him, Turn thou again, seven times.
1KI 18:44 And in the seventh time, lo! a little cloud, as the step of a man, went up from the sea. And Elijah said, Go thou up, and say to Ahab, Join thy chariot, and go down, lest the rain before-occupy thee.
1KI 18:45 And when they turned them hither and thither, lo! heavens were made dark, and cloud, and wind, and great rain was made. Therefore Ahab went up into his chariot, and went into Jezreel;
1KI 18:46 and the hand of the Lord was made upon Elijah, and when his loins were girded, he ran before Ahab, till he came into Jezreel.
1KI 19:1 Forsooth Ahab told to Jezebel all things that Elijah had done, and how he had slain with sword all the prophets of Baal.
1KI 19:2 And Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah, and said, Gods do these things to me, and add these things too, no but tomorrow in this hour I shall put thy life as the life of one of them.
1KI 19:3 Therefore Elijah dreaded, and rose, and went whither ever his will bare him; and he came into Beersheba of Judah, and he left there his child;
1KI 19:4 and went into desert, the way of one day. And when he came, and sat under one juniper tree, he asked to his soul, that he should die; and he said, Lord, it sufficeth to me, take my soul; for I am not better than my fathers.
1KI 19:5 And he casted forth himself, and slept in the shadow of the juniper tree. And lo! the angel of the Lord touched him, and said to him, Rise thou, and eat.
1KI 19:6 He beheld, and, lo! at his head was a loaf baked under ashes, and a vessel of water. Therefore he ate, and drank, and slept again.
1KI 19:7 And the angel of the Lord turned again the second time, and touched him; and he said to him, Rise thou, and eat; for a great way is to thee.
1KI 19:8 And when he had risen, he ate, and drank; and he went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights, unto Horeb, the hill of God.
1KI 19:9 And when he had come thither, he dwelled in a den; and lo! the word of the Lord was made to him, and said to him, Elijah, what doest thou here?
1KI 19:10 And he answered, By fervent love, that is, of all the heart, I have loved fervently, for the Lord God of hosts; for the sons of Israel have forsaken the covenant of the Lord; they have destroyed thine altars, and killed with sword thy prophets; and I am left alone, and they seek my life, that they do it away.
1KI 19:11 And he said to Elijah, Go thou out, and stand in the hill, before the Lord. And lo! the Lord passeth by, and a great wind, and strong, turning upside-down hills, and all-breaking stones before the Lord; not in the wind is the Lord. And after the wind is a stirring; not in the stirring is the Lord.
1KI 19:12 And after the stirring is a fire; not in the fire is the Lord. And after the fire is an hissing of thin wind, or breathing softly; there is the Lord.
1KI 19:13 And when Elijah had heard this, he covered his face with a mantle, and he went out, and stood in the door of the den. And a voice spake to him, and said, Elijah, what doest thou here?
1KI 19:14 And he answered, With fervent love I have loved fervently, for the Lord God of hosts; for the sons of Israel have forsaken thy covenant; they have destroyed thine altars, and they have killed with sword thy prophets; and I am left alone, and they seek my life, that they do it away.
1KI 19:15 And the Lord said to him, Go, and turn again into thy way, by the desert, into Damascus; and when thou shalt come thither, thou shalt anoint Hazael king upon Syria;
1KI 19:16 and thou shalt anoint king upon Israel, Jehu, the son of Nimshi; and thou shalt anoint a prophet for thee, Elisha, the son of Shaphat, that is of Abelmeholah.
1KI 19:17 And it shall be, whoever shall flee the sword of Hazael, Jehu shall slay him; and whoever shall flee the sword of Jehu, Elisha shall slay him.
1KI 19:18 And I shall leave to me in Israel seven thousand of men, of which the knees be not bowed before Baal, and each mouth that worshipped not him, and kissed not his hand.
1KI 19:19 Therefore Elijah went forth from thence, and found Elisha, the son of Shaphat, earing in twelve yokes of oxen; and he was one in the twelve yokes of oxen, earing. And when Elijah had come to him, Elijah [[or he]] casted his mantle upon him.
1KI 19:20 And he ran anon after Elijah, when the oxen were left, and said, I pray thee, kiss I my father and my mother, and so I shall pursue [[or follow]] thee. And Elijah said to him, Go thou, and turn again, for I have done to thee that that was mine to do.
1KI 19:21 Soothly he turned again from Elijah, and took twain [[or a pair of]] oxen, and killed them; and with the plow of the oxen he seethed the flesh, and gave to the people, and they ate; and he rose, and went, and pursued [[or followed]] Elijah, and ministered to him.
1KI 20:1 Forsooth Benhadad, king of Syria, gathered together all his host, and two and thirty kings with him, and horses, and chariots; and he went up against Samaria, and fought, and besieged it.
1KI 20:2 And he sent messengers to Ahab, king of Israel, into the city, and they said to him, Benhadad saith these things,
1KI 20:3 Thy silver and thy gold is mine, and thy wives, and thy best sons be mine.
1KI 20:4 And the king of Israel answered, By thy word, my lord the king, I am thine, and all my things be thine.
1KI 20:5 And the messengers turned again, and said, Benhadad, that sent us to thee, saith these things, Thou shalt give to me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy sons.
1KI 20:6 Therefore tomorrow, in this same hour, I shall send my servants to thee, and they shall seek throughout thine house, and the house of thy servants; and they shall put in their hands, and take away all thing that shall please them.
1KI 20:7 Forsooth the king of Israel called all the elder men of the land, and said, Perceive ye, and see, that he setteth treason to us; for he sent to me for my wives, and sons, and for silver, and gold, and I forsook not.
1KI 20:8 And all the greater men in birth, and all the people said to him, Hear thou not, neither assent thou to him.
1KI 20:9 And he answered to the messengers of Benhadad, Say ye to my lord the king, I shall do all things, for which thou sentest in the beginning to me, thy servant; but I may not do this thing. And the messengers turned again, and told all things to him.
1KI 20:10 Which sent again, and said, Gods do these things to me, and add these things too, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice to the fist[[ful]] s of all the people that pursueth [[or followeth]] me.
1KI 20:11 And the king of Israel answered, and said, Say ye to him, A girded man, that is, he that goeth to battle, have not glory evenly as a man ungirded, that is, as he that hath the victory, and hath put off his armours.
1KI 20:12 And it was done, when Benhadad had heard this word, he drank, and also the kings, in shadowing places; and he said to his servants, Encompass ye the city. And they encompassed it.
1KI 20:13 And lo! one prophet nighed to Ahab, king of Israel, and said to him, The Lord God saith these things, Certainly thou hast seen all this multitude full great; lo! I shall betake it into thine hand today, that thou know that I am the Lord.
1KI 20:14 And Ahab said, By whom? And he said to Ahab, The Lord saith these things, By the squires, or the footmen, of the princes of provinces. And Ahab said, Who shall begin to fight? And the prophet said, Thou.
1KI 20:15 Therefore he numbered the chil-dren or servants of the princes of [[the]] provinces, and he found the number of two hundred and two and thirty; and after them he numbered the people, all the sons of Israel, seven thousand.
1KI 20:16 And they went out in midday. Forsooth Benhadad drank, and was drunken in his shadowing place, and two and thirty kings with him, that came to the help of him.
1KI 20:17 And the children of the princes of provinces went out in the first front. Therefore Benhadad sent men, which told to him, and said, Men went out of Samaria.
1KI 20:18 And he said, Whether they come for peace, take ye them quick; whether to fight, take ye them quick. [[And he saith, Whether for peace they come, taketh them alive; whether that they fight, taketh them alive.]]
1KI 20:19 Therefore the children of the princes of provinces went out, and the residue host pursued [[or followed]];
1KI 20:20 and each smote the man that came against him. And men of Syria fled, and Israel pursued them; also Benhadad, the king of Syria, fled on an horse with his knights.
1KI 20:21 Also the king of Israel went out, and smote horses and chariots, and he smote Syria with a full great vengeance.
1KI 20:22 Forsooth a prophet nighed to the king of Israel, and said, Go thou, and be comforted, and know, and see, what thou shalt do; for the king of Syria shall ascend [[or go up]] against thee in the year pursuing [[or following]].
1KI 20:23 Soothly the servants of the king of Syria said to him, The Gods of hills be the Gods of the sons of Israel, therefore they overcame us; but it is better that we fight against them in [[the]] field places, and we shall get them there.
1KI 20:24 Therefore do thou this word, or counsel; remove thou all [[the]] kings from thine host, and set thou [[or put]] princes for them;
1KI 20:25 and restore thou the number of knights, that felled [[or fell]] of thine, and [[the]] horses after the former horses, and restore thou[[the]] chariots, by the chariots which thou haddest before; and we shall fight against them in [[the]] field places, and thou shalt see, that we shall get them. He believed to the counsel of them, and did so.
1KI 20:26 Therefore after that the year had passed, Benhadad numbered men of Syria, and he went up into Aphek, to fight against Israel.
1KI 20:27 Forsooth the sons of Israel were numbered; and when meats were taken, they went forth even against; and they, as two little flocks of goats, setted tents against men of Syria. Forsooth men of Syria filled the land.
1KI 20:28 And one prophet of God nighed, and said to the king of Israel, The Lord God saith these things, For men of Syria said, God of hills is the Lord of them, and he is not God of valleys, I shall give all this great multitude in thine hand, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.
1KI 20:29 And seven days these and they dressed battle arrays even against each other; and in the seventh day the battle was joined altogether, and the sons of Israel smote of the men of Syria an hundred thousand of footmen in one day.
1KI 20:30 And they that were left fled into the city of Aphek, and the wall felled [[or fell]] down upon seven and twenty thousand of men that were left. Forsooth Benhadad fled, and entered into the city, into a closet that was within a bed-closet;
1KI 20:31 and his servants said to him, [[Lo!]] We have heard that the kings of the house of Israel be merciful, therefore put we sackcloths in our loins, and cords in our heads, and go we out to the king of Israel; in hap he shall save our lives.
1KI 20:32 They girded their loins with sackcloths, and put cords in their heads, and they came to the king of Israel, and said to him, Thy servant Benhadad saith, I pray thee, let my soul live. And he said, If Benhadad liveth yet, he is my brother.
1KI 20:33 Which thing the men of Syria took for a gracious word, and they ravished hastily the word of his mouth, and said, Thy brother Benhadad liveth. And Ahab said to them, Go ye, and bring ye him to me. Therefore Benhadad went out to him, and he raised up Benhadad into his chariot.
1KI 20:34 [[The]] Which Benhadad said to him, I shall yield the cities which my father took from thy father, and make thou streets to thee in Damascus, as my father made in Samaria; and I shall be bound to peace, and I shall depart from thee. Therefore Ahab made [[a]] bond of peace with him, and delivered him.
1KI 20:35 Then a man of the sons of the prophets said to his fellow, in the word of the Lord, Smite thou me. And he would not smite.
1KI 20:36 To whom the prophet said, For thou wouldest not hear the voice of the Lord, lo! thou shalt go [[away]] from me, and a lion shall smite thee. And when he had gone a little from him, a lion found him, and slew him.
1KI 20:37 But also the prophet found another man, and he said to that man, Smite thou me. And he smote him, and wounded him.
1KI 20:38 Therefore the prophet went, and met the king in the way; and he changed with a cloth, that is, by wrap-ping of a cloth, his mouth and eyes.
1KI 20:39 And when the king had passed by, he cried to the king, and said, Thy servant went out to fight anon, and when one man had fled, a man brought him to me, and said, Keep thou this man; and if he escapeth, thy life shall be for his life, either thou shalt pay a talent of silver.
1KI 20:40 Soothly while I was troubled, and turned me hither and thither, suddenly he appeared not. And the king of Israel said to him, This is thy doom that thou [[thyself]] hast deemed.
1KI 20:41 And anon he removed the cloth, either binding, from his face, and the king of Israel knew him, that he was of the prophets.
1KI 20:42 The which said to the king, The Lord saith these things, For thou deliveredest from thine hand a man worthy of death, thy life shall be for his life, and thy people for his people.
1KI 20:43 Therefore the king of Israel turned again into his house, and despised to hear God’s word, and came wroth into Samaria.
1KI 21:1 Forsooth after these words, in that time, the vinery [[or vine]] of Naboth of Jezreel, that was in Jezreel, was beside the palace of Ahab, king of Samaria.
1KI 21:2 Therefore Ahab spake to Naboth, and said, Give thou to me thy vineyard, that I make to me thereof a garden of worts, for it is nigh to me, and nigh mine house; and I shall give to thee a better vinery [[or vineyard]] for it; either if thou guessest it more profitable to thee, I shall give thee the price of silver, as much as it is worth.
1KI 21:3 To whom Naboth answered, The Lord be merciful to me, that I give not to thee the heritage of my fathers.
1KI 21:4 Therefore Ahab came into his house, having indignation, and gnashing on the word which Naboth of Jezreel had spoken to him, and said, I shall not give to thee the heritage of my fathers. And Ahab casted down himself into his bed, and turned away his face to the wall, and ate not bread.
1KI 21:5 And Jezebel, his wife, entered to him, and said to him, What is this thing, whereof thy soul is made sorry? and why eatest thou not bread?
1KI 21:6 Which answered to her, I spake to Naboth of Jezreel, and I said to him, Give thy vineyard to me for money taken, either if it pleaseth thee, I shall give to thee a better vinery [[or vineyard]] for it. And he said, I shall not give to thee my vineyard.
1KI 21:7 Therefore Jezebel, his wife, said to him, Thou art of great authority, and thou governest well [[the realm of]] Israel; rise thou, and eat bread, and be thou patient, either comforted; I shall give to thee the vinery [[or vineyard]] of Naboth of Jezreel.
1KI 21:8 Therefore she wrote letters in the name of Ahab, and sealed those [[or them]] with the ring of him; and she sent to the greater men in birth, and to the best men, that were in the city of Naboth, and dwelled with him.
1KI 21:9 And this was the sentence of the letters; Preach ye fasting, and make ye Naboth to sit among the first men of the people;
1KI 21:10 and send ye privily two men, the sons of Belial, against him, and say they false witnessing, Naboth hath blessed God, and the king, that is, hath cursed; and lead ye out him, and stone ye him, and die he so.
1KI 21:11 Therefore his citizens, the greater men in birth, and the best men that dwelled with him in the city, did as Jezebel had commanded [[to them]], and as it was written in the letters, which she had sent to them.
1KI 21:12 They preached fasting, and made Naboth to sit among the first men of the people;
1KI 21:13 and when two men, sons of the devil, were brought, they made them to sit against him, and they, that is, as men of the devil, said false witnessing against him before all the multitude, Naboth blessed God, and the king, that is, Naboth hath cursed God, and the king; for which thing they led him without the city, and killed him with stones.
1KI 21:14 And they sent to Jezebel, and said, Naboth is stoned, and is dead.
1KI 21:15 Forsooth it was done, when Jezebel had heard Naboth stoned and dead, she spake to Ahab, Rise thou, take in possession the vinery [[or vineyard]] of Naboth of Jezreel, which would not assent to thee, and give it for [[the]] money taken; for Naboth liveth not, but is dead.
1KI 21:16 And when Ahab had heard this, that is, Naboth to be dead, he rose, and went down into the vinery [[or vineyard]] of Naboth of Jezreel, to have it into possession.
1KI 21:17 Therefore the word of the Lord was made to Elijah of Tishbe, and said,
1KI 21:18 Rise thou, go down into the coming of Ahab, king of Israel, which is in Samaria; lo! he goeth down to the vinery [[or vineyard]] of Naboth, that he have it in possession.
1KI 21:19 And thou shalt speak to him, and say, The Lord saith these things, Thou hast slain Naboth, furthermore and thou hast taken his vineyard in possession; and after these things thou shalt add, [[These things saith the Lord]], In this place, wherein dogs licked the blood of Naboth, they shall lick also thy blood.
1KI 21:20 And Ahab said to Elijah, Whether thou hast found me thine enemy? And Elijah said, I have found thee so, for thou art sold to the devil that thou shouldest do evil in the sight of the Lord.
1KI 21:21 Therefore the Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall bring in upon thee evil, and I shall cut away thine hinder things, and I shall slay of Ahab a pisser to the wall, and the imprisoned, and the last in Israel;
1KI 21:22 and I shall give thine house to be as the house of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, and as the house of Baasha, the son of Ahijah; for thou didest evil to excite [[or stir]] me to wrathfulness, and madest Israel to do sin.
1KI 21:23 But also the Lord spake of Jezebel, and said, Dogs shall eat Jezebel in the field of Jezreel;
1KI 21:24 if Ahab shall die in the city, dogs shall eat him; soothly if he shall die in the field, birds of the air shall eat him.
1KI 21:25 Therefore none other was such as Ahab, that was sold to do evil in the sight of the Lord; for Jezebel his wife excited [[or stirred]] him thereto;
1KI 21:26 and he was made abominable, in so much that he followed the idols that Amorites made, which men the Lord wasted from before the face of the sons of Israel.
1KI 21:27 Therefore when Ahab had heard these words, he rent his cloth, and covered his flesh with an hair-shirt, and he fasted, and slept in a sackcloth, and went with the head cast down.
1KI 21:28 And the word of the Lord was made to Elijah of Tishbe, and said,
1KI 21:29 Whether thou hast not seen Ahab made low before me? Therefore for he is made low for the cause of me, I shall not bring in evil in his days, but in the days of his son I shall bring in evil to his house.
1KI 22:1 Therefore three years passed with-out battle betwixt Syria and Israel.
1KI 22:2 And in the third year Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, went down to the king of Israel.
1KI 22:3 And the king of Israel said to his servants, Know ye not, that Ramoth of Gilead is ours, and we be negligent to not take it back from the hand of the king of Syria?
1KI 22:4 And he said to Jehoshaphat, Whether thou shalt come with me to fight in Ramoth of Gilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, As I am, so and thou; my people and thy people be one; and my knights and thy knights be one.
1KI 22:5 And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I pray thee, ask thou today the word of the Lord.
1KI 22:6 Therefore the king of Israel gathered together [[the]] prophets, about four hundred men, and he said to them, Owe I to go into Ramoth of Gilead to fight, either owe I to rest? Which answered, Go thou up, and the Lord shall give it into the hand of the king.
1KI 22:7 Forsooth Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here any other prophet of the Lord, that we ask by him?
1KI 22:8 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, One man, Micaiah, the son of Imlah, is left, by whom we may ask the Lord; but I hate him, for he prophesieth not good to me, but evil. To whom Jehoshaphat said, King, speak thou not so.
1KI 22:9 Therefore the king of Israel called some chamberlain, and said to him, Haste thou to bring Micaiah, [[the]] son of Imlah.
1KI 22:10 Forsooth the king of Israel, and Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, sat, each in his throne, clothed with king’s ornament, in the large house beside the door, or wicket, of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied in the sight of them.
1KI 22:11 Also Zedekiah, the son of Chena-anah, made to himself horns of iron, and said, The Lord God saith these things, With these thou shalt scatter Syria, till thou do away it.
1KI 22:12 And all [[the]] prophets prophesied in like manner, and said, Ascend thou [[or Go up]] into Ramoth of Gilead, and go thou with prosperity; and the Lord shall betake thine enemies into the hand of the king.
1KI 22:13 Soothly the messenger, that went to call Micaiah, spake to him, and said, Lo! the words of the prophets with one mouth preach goods [[or good things]] to the king; therefore thy word be like them, and speak thou goods.
1KI 22:14 To whom Micaiah said, The Lord liveth, for whatever thing the Lord shall say to me, I shall speak this.
1KI 22:15 Therefore he came to the king. And the king said to him, Micaiah, owe we go into Ramoth of Gilead to fight, either cease? To which king he answered, Ascend thou or Go up, and go in prosperity; and the Lord shall betake it into the hand of the king.
1KI 22:16 Forsooth the king said to him, Again and again I conjure [[or adjure]] thee, that thou speak not to me, no but that that is sooth in the name of the Lord.
1KI 22:17 And he said, I saw all Israel scattered in the hills, as sheep not having a shepherd; and the Lord said, These have no lord, each man turn again into his house in peace.
1KI 22:18 Therefore the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Whether I said not to thee, that he prophesieth not good to me, but ever[[more]] evil?
1KI 22:19 Soothly that Micaiah added, and said, Therefore hear thou the word of the Lord; I saw the Lord sitting on his throne, and I saw all the host of heaven standing nigh [[to]] him, on the right side and on the left side.
1KI 22:20 And the Lord said, Who shall deceive Ahab, king of Israel, that he ascend or go up, and fall in Ramoth of Gilead? And one said such words, and another in another manner.
1KI 22:21 Soothly a spirit went out, and went before the Lord, and said, I shall deceive him.
1KI 22:22 To whom the Lord spake, In what thing? And he said, I shall go out, and I shall be a spirit of leasing in the mouth of all his prophets. And the Lord said, Thou shalt deceive him, and shalt have the mastery; go thou out, and do so.
1KI 22:23 Now therefore, lo! the Lord gave a spirit of leasing in the mouth of all prophets that be here; and the Lord spake evil against thee.
1KI 22:24 Forsooth Zedekiah, [[the]] son of Chenaanah, nighed, and smote Micaiah on the cheek, and said, Whether the Spirit of the Lord forsook me, and spake to thee?
1KI 22:25 And Micaiah said, Thou shalt see in that day, when thou shalt go into a closet within a bed-closet, that thou be hid.
1KI 22:26 And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah, and dwell he at Amon, [[the]] prince of the city, and at Joash, the son of Amalek;
1KI 22:27 and say ye to them, The king saith these things, Send ye this man into prison, and sustain ye him with bread of tribulation, and with water of anguish, till I turn again in peace.
1KI 22:28 And Micaiah said, If thou shalt turn again in peace, the Lord spake not in me. And he said, Hear ye, all peoples.
1KI 22:29 Therefore the king of Israel ascended or went up, and Jehosh-aphat, king of Judah, into Ramoth of Gilead.
1KI 22:30 Therefore the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Take thou armours [[or arms]], and enter thou into battle, and be thou clothed in thy clothes, that is, in the noble signs of the king. Certainly the king of Israel changed his clothing, and entered into battle.
1KI 22:31 Soothly the king of Syria had commanded to [[the]] two and thirty princes of chariots, and said, Ye shall not fight against any man [[the]] less, either [[the]] more, but against the king of Israel only.
1KI 22:32 Therefore when the princes of chariots had seen Jehoshaphat, they supposed that he was king of Israel, and by fierceness made, they fought against him. And Jehoshaphat cried [[out]], calling for God’s help, and declaring his banner;
1KI 22:33 and the princes of [[the]] chariots understood, that it was not the king of Israel, and they ceased from pursuing him.
1KI 22:34 Soothly some man bent a bow, and dressed an arrow into uncertain, and by hap he smote the king of Israel betwixt the lung and the stomach. And the king said to his charioteer, Turn thine hand, and cast me out of the host, for I am wounded grievously.
1KI 22:35 Therefore [[the]] battle was joined in that day, and the king of Israel stood in his chariot against men of Syria, and he was dead at eventide. Forsooth the blood of the wound floated [[or flowed]] down into the bottom of the chariot.
1KI 22:36 And a crier sounded in all the host, before that the sun went down, and said, Each man turn again into his city, and into his land.
1KI 22:37 Forsooth the king was dead, and was borne into Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria.
1KI 22:38 And they washed his chariot in the cistern of Samaria, and dogs licked his blood, and they washed the armours, by the word of the Lord which he had spoken.
1KI 22:39 Soothly the residue of [[the]] words of Ahab, and all things which he did, and the house of ivory which he builded, and of all [[the]] cities which he builded, whether these be not written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of the kings of Israel?
1KI 22:40 Therefore Ahab slept with his fathers, and Ahaziah, his son, reigned for him.
1KI 22:41 Forsooth Jehoshaphat, [[the]] son of Asa, began to reign on Judah in the fourth year of Ahab, king of Israel.
1KI 22:42 Jehoshaphat was of five and thirty years, when he began to reign, and he reigned five and twenty years in Jerusalem; the name of his mother was Azubah, [[the]] daughter of Shilhi.
1KI 22:43 And he went in all the way of Asa, his father, and [[he]] bowed not [[aside]] from it; and he did that, that was rightful [[or right]] in the sight of the Lord. Nevertheless he did not away [[the]] high things, for yet the people made sacrifice, and burnt incense, in high places.
1KI 22:44 And Jehoshaphat had peace with the king of Israel.
1KI 22:45 Soothly the residue of [[the]] words of Jehoshaphat, and the works and battles, which he did, whether these be not written in the book of [[the]] words of [[the]] days of the kings of Judah?
1KI 22:46 But also he took away from the land the relics of [[the]] men turned into women’s conditions [[or womanish-made men]], that were left in the days of Asa, his father.
1KI 22:47 Neither a king was ordained then in Edom; but a deputy, appointed by the king of Judah, ruled over it.
1KI 22:48 Forsooth king Jehoshaphat made ships in the sea, that should sail into Ophir for gold, and those [[or they]] might not go, for they were broken in Eziongeber.
1KI 22:49 Then Ahaziah, [[the]] son of Ahab, said to Jehoshaphat, My servants go with thine in our ships. And Jehosh-aphat would not consent to that.
1KI 22:50 And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in the city of David, his father; and Jehoram, his son, reigned for him.
1KI 22:51 Forsooth Ahaziah, [[the]] son of Ahab, began to reign on Israel, in Samaria, in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah; and Ahaziah reigned on Israel two years.
1KI 22:52 And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and went in the way of his father, and of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam, [[the]] son of Nebat, that made Israel to do sin.
1KI 22:53 And he served Baal, and worship-ped him, and wrathed the Lord God of Israel, by all things which his father had done.
NEH 1:1 The words of Nehemiah, the son of Hachaliah. And it was done in the month of Chisleu, that is, November, in the twentieth year, and I was in the castle of Susa;
NEH 1:2 and Hanani, one of my brethren, came to me, he and men of Judah; and I asked them of the Jews, that were left, and were alive of the captivity, and of Jerusalem.
NEH 1:3 And they said to me, They that be left of the captivity, and that dwelled there still in the province, be in great torment, and shame; and the wall of Jerusalem is destroyed, and the gates of it be burnt with fire.
NEH 1:4 And when I had heard such words, I sat and wept, and mourned many days, and I fasted, and prayed before the face of God of heaven;
NEH 1:5 and I said, I beseech thee, Lord God of heaven, that art strong, great, and fearedful, that keepest covenant and mercy with them that love thee, and keep thy behests;
NEH 1:6 thine ear be made hearkening, and thine eyes opened, that thou hear the prayer of thy servant, by which prayer I pray before thee now, by night and day, for the sons of Israel, thy servants, and I acknowledge for the sins of the sons of Israel, by which they have sinned to thee; both I and the house of my father have sinned;
NEH 1:7 we were deceived by vanity, and we kept not thy commandments, and ceremonies, and dooms, which thou commandedest to Moses, thy servant.
NEH 1:8 Have mind of the word, which thou commandedest to thy servant Moses, and saidest, When ye have trespassed, I shall scatter you into peoples;
NEH 1:9 and if ye turn again to me, that ye keep my behests, and do those [[or them]], yea, though ye be led away to the furthest things of heaven, from thence I shall gather you together, and I shall bring you into the place, that I have chosen, that my name should dwell there.
NEH 1:10 And we be thy servants, and thy people, which thou hast again-bought in thy great strength, and in thy strong hand.
NEH 1:11 Lord, I beseech thee, thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, that will dread thy name; and dress thy servant today, and give thou mercy to him before this man, that is, Artaxerxes, king. For I was the bottler of the king.
NEH 2:1 And it was done in the month of Nisan, that is, April, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, the king, and wine was before him, and I took up the wine, and I gave it to the king, and I was as languishing before his face.
NEH 2:2 And the king said to me, Why is thy cheer sorry, or heavy, since I see not thee sick? This is not without cause; but I know not what evil is in thine heart. And I dreaded full greatly;
NEH 2:3 and I said to the king, King, live thou without end; why should not my cheer mourn? for the city of the house of the sepulchres of my father[[s]] is deserted, either forsaken, and the gates thereof be burnt with fire.
NEH 2:4 And the king said to me, For what thing askest thou? And I prayed God of heaven,
NEH 2:5 and I said to the king, If it seemeth good to the king, and if it pleaseth thy servants which be before thy face, I beseech thee, that thou send me into Judah, to the city of the sepulchres of my fathers, and I shall rebuild it.
NEH 2:6 And the king said to me, and the queen sat beside him, Unto what time shall thy way be, and when shalt thou turn again? And it pleased to the king, and he sent me forth, and I set to the king a time of coming again;
NEH 2:7 and I said to the king, If it seemeth good to the king, give he epistles, or letters, to me to the dukes of the country beyond the flood, that they lead me over, till I come into Judah;
NEH 2:8 and a letter to Asaph, the keeper of the king’s forest, that he give trees to me, that I may cover the gates of the tower of the house, and of the wall of the city, and the house, into which I shall enter. And the king gave the letters to me, by the good hand of my God with me.
NEH 2:9 And I came to the dukes of the country beyond the flood, and I gave to them the letters of the king. Soothly the king had sent with me the princes of knights, and horsemen.
NEH 2:10 And Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah, the servant, the Ammonite, heard, and they were sorrowful by great torment, that a man was come, that sought prosperity of the sons of Israel.
NEH 2:11 And I came into Jerusalem, and I was there three days.
NEH 2:12 And I rose up by night, I and a few men with me, and I showed not to any man, what thing God had given in mine heart, that I would do in Jerusalem; and there was no work beast with me, but the beast that I sat on.
NEH 2:13 And I went out by the gate of the valley by night, and before the well of the dragon, and to the gate of dung; and I beheld the wall of Jerusalem destroyed, and the gates thereof wasted by fire.
NEH 2:14 And I passed forth to the gate of the well, and to the water conduit of the king, and there was no place for to pass, to the horse, that I sat upon;
NEH 2:15 and in the night I went up by the strand [[or stream]], and I beheld the wall, and I turned again, and came to the gate of the valley, and I went again to my lodging.
NEH 2:16 Forsooth the magistrates knew not, whither I had gone, either what I would do; but also I had not showed anything to the Jews, and [[the]] priests, and to the best men, and [[the]] magistrates, and to [[the]] other men that made the work, till that time.
NEH 2:17 And I said to them, Ye know the torment, in which we Jews be, for Jerusalem is deserted, and the gates thereof be wasted with fire; come ye, build we [[up]] the walls of Jerusalem, and be we no more a shame or in shame.
NEH 2:18 And I showed to them the hand of my God, that it was good with me, and the words of the king, which he spake to me; and I said, Rise we up, and build we; and the hands of them were comforted in good.
NEH 2:19 And Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah, the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem of Arabs, heard this, and they scorned us, and despised; and said, What is this thing, that ye do? whether ye rebel against the king?
NEH 2:20 And I answered to them a word, and I said to them, God himself of heaven helpeth us, and we be his servants; rise we up, and build; forsooth part, and rightwiseness, and mind, in Jerusalem, is not to you.
NEH 3:1 And Eliashib, the great priest, rose up, and his brethren, and priests, and they builded the gate of the flock; they made it steadfast; and they set up the gates thereof, and unto the tower of an hundred cubits they made it steadfast, unto the tower of Hananeel.
NEH 3:2 And beside him the men of Jericho builded; and beside them builded Zaccur, the son of Imri.
NEH 3:3 And the sons of Hassenaah builded the gates of fishes; they covered it, and setted the gates thereof, and locks, and bars.
NEH 3:4 And Meremoth, the son of Urijah, the son of Hakkoz, builded beside them. And Meshullam, the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabeel, builded beside him. And Zadok, the son of Baana, builded beside him.
NEH 3:5 And men of Tekoa builded beside him; but the principal men of them under-putted not their necks in the work of their Lord God.
NEH 3:6 And Jehoiada, the son of Paseah, and Meshullam, the son of Besodeiah, builded the old gate; they builded it, and setted up the gates thereof, and the locks, and bars.
NEH 3:7 And Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, builded beside them, for the duke that was in the country beyond the flood.
NEH 3:8 And Uzziel, the goldsmith, the son of Harhaiah, builded beside him; and Hananiah, the son of an ointment maker, builded beside him; and they let go Jerusalem till to the wall of the larger street.
NEH 3:9 And Rephaiah, the son of Hur, prince of a street of Jerusalem, builded beside them.
NEH 3:10 And Jedaiah, the son of Harumaph, builded beside them over against his own house; and Hattush, the son of Hashabniah, builded beside him.
NEH 3:11 And Malchijah, the son of Harim, and Hashub, the son of Pahathmoab, builded the half part of the street, and the tower of ovens.
NEH 3:12 Shallum, the son of Halohesh, prince of the half part of a street of Jerusalem, builded beside him, he and his sons.
NEH 3:13 And Hanun, and the dwellers of Zanoah, builded the gate of the valley; they builded it, and setted up the gates thereof, and the locks and bars thereof; and they builded a thousand cubits in the wall unto the gate of the dunghill.
NEH 3:14 And Malchiah, the son of Rechab, prince of a street of Bethhaccerem, builded the gate of the dunghill; he builded it, and setted it up, and covered the gates thereof, and locks, and bars.
NEH 3:15 And Shallun, the son of Colhozeh, prince of a town of Mizpah, builded the gate of the well; he builded it, and covered it, and he set up the gates thereof, and locks, and bars; and he builded the walls of the cistern of Siloah, unto the orchard of the king, and unto the degrees of the king, which come down from the city of David.
NEH 3:16 And Nehemiah, the son of Azbuk, prince of the half part of the street of Bethzur, builded after him, unto over against the sepulchre of David, and unto the cistern, that is builded with great work, and unto the house of strong men.
NEH 3:17 And deacons [[or Levites]] builded after him; and Rehum, the son of Bani, builded after them. And Hashabiah, the prince of half part of the street of Keilah, builded in his street after him.
NEH 3:18 The brethren of them, Bavai, the son of Henadad, prince of the half part of Keilah, builded after him.
NEH 3:19 And Ezer, the son of Jeshua, prince of Mizpah, builded beside him the second measure, against the going up of the strongest corner.
NEH 3:20 And Baruch, the son of Zabbai, builded after him in the hill the second measure, from the corner unto the gate of the house of Eliashib, the great priest.
NEH 3:21 And Meremoth, the son of Urijah, son of Hakkoz, builded after him the second measure, from the gate [[of the house]] of Eliashib, as far as the house of Eliashib was stretched forth.
NEH 3:22 And [[the]] priests, men of the field places of Jordan, builded after him.
NEH 3:23 And Benjamin and Hashub builded after him over against their house; and Azariah, the son of Maaseiah, son of Ananiah, builded after him over against his own house.
NEH 3:24 And Binnui, the son of Henadad, builded after him the second measure, from the house of Azariah unto the bowing of the wall, and unto the corner.
NEH 3:25 Palal, the son of Uzai, builded over against the bowing of the wall, and the tower that standeth forth, from the high house of the king, that is in the large place of the prison; Pedaiah, the son of Parosh, builded after him.
NEH 3:26 And Nethinims dwelled in Ophel till against the gate of waters at the east, and the tower that appeared over the others.
NEH 3:27 After him men of Tekoa builded the second measure even over against, from the great tower, and appearing unto the wall of the temple.
NEH 3:28 And [[the]] priests builded above at the gate of horses, each man over against his house.
NEH 3:29 And Zadok, the son of Immer, builded over against his house after them. And Shemaiah, the son of Shech-aniah, the keeper of the east gate, builded after him.
NEH 3:30 Hananiah, the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun, the sixth son of Zalaph, builded after him the second measure. Meshullam, the son of Berechiah, builded over against his chamber after him.
NEH 3:31 Malchiah, the son of a goldsmith, builded after him unto the house of Nethinims, and of men selling shields, over against the gate of judges, and unto the solar of the corner.
NEH 3:32 And craftsmen and merchants builded within the solar of the corner, and the gate of the king.
NEH 4:1 And it was done, when Sanballat had heard, that we builded the wall, he was full wroth, and he was stirred greatly, and he scorned the Jews.
NEH 4:2 And he said before his brethren, and the multitude of Samaritans, What do the feeble Jews? Whether heathen men shall suffer them? Whether they shall [[ful]] fill, and make sacrifice in one day? Whether they may build stones of the heaps of the dust, which be burnt?
NEH 4:3 And also Tobiah the Ammonite, his neighbour, said, Build they; if a fox go up, he shall over-leap their stone wall.
NEH 4:4 And Nehemiah said in prayer, Our God, hear thou, for we be made despising; turn thou the shame upon their own heads, and give thou them into despising in the land of captivity;
NEH 4:5 cover thou not the wickedness of them, and their sins be not done away before thy face; for they scorned the builders.
NEH 4:6 Therefore we builded the wall, and joined together all till to the half part, and the heart of the people was excited to work.
NEH 4:7 And it was done when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and Arabians, and Ammonites, and men of Ashdod had heard, that the breaking of the wall of Jerusalem was stopped, and that the crazings had begun to be closed together, they were full wroth.
NEH 4:8 And they all were gathered together to come and fight against Jerusalem, and to cast treasons against it.
NEH 4:9 And we prayed the Lord our God, and we setted keepers on the wall day and night against them.
NEH 4:10 And Judah said, The strength of the bearer is made feeble, and the earth is full much, and we be not able to build the wall.
NEH 4:11 And our enemies said, Know they not, and know they not, till we come into the middle of them, and slay them, and make the work to cease.
NEH 4:12 Forsooth it was done, when [[the]] Jews came, that dwelled beside them, and said to us by ten times, from all places from which they came to us,
NEH 4:13 I ordained the people in order, with their swords, and spears, and bows, in a place behind the wall by compass.
NEH 4:14 I beheld, and rose, and said to the principal men, and magistrates, and to the other part of the common people, Do not ye dread of their face; but have ye mind of the great Lord, and fearedful, and fight ye for your brothers, and your sons, and your daughters, for your wives, and houses.
NEH 4:15 And it was done, when our enemies had heard that it was told to us, God destroyed their counsel; and then all we turned again to the walls, each man to his work.
NEH 4:16 And it was done from that day, the half part of the young men made the work, and the half part was ready to battle; and held spears, and shields, and bows, and habergeons, and princes after them, in all the house of men of Judah,
NEH 4:17 building in the wall, and bearing burdens, and putting on; with their one hand they made the work, and with the other they held their sword.
NEH 4:18 For each of the builders was girded with a sword upon his reins; and they builded the wall, and they sounded with clarions beside me.
NEH 4:19 And I said to the principal men, and magistrates, and to the other part of the common people, The work is great and broad, and we be separated far in the wall, one from another;
NEH 4:20 therefore in whatever place that ye hear [[the]] sound of the trump, run ye together thither to us; for our God shall fight for us.
NEH 4:21 And we ourselves shall make the work, and the half of us hold we spears, from the going up of the morrowtide till that [[the]] stars go out.
NEH 4:22 And in that time I said to the people, Each man with his servant dwell he in the midst of Jerusalem, and whiles be to us by night, and day to work.
NEH 4:23 But I, and my brethren, and my keepers, and [[my]] servants, that were going after me, did not put off our clothes; each man was made naked only to washing.
NEH 5:1 And great cry of the people and of their wives was made against their brethren Jews.
NEH 5:2 And there were that said, Our sons and our daughters be full many; take we wheat for the price of them, and eat we, and live.
NEH 5:3 Also there were that said, Set we forth to sale our fields, and vineries [[or vines]], and our houses, and take we wheat to eat in this hunger.
NEH 5:4 And other men said, Take we money by borrowing, for usury, into the tributes of the king, and give our fields and vineries [[or vines]].
NEH 5:5 And now as the fleshes of our brethren be, so and our fleshes be; and as be the sons of them, so and our sons be; lo! we have made subject our sons and our daughters into servage, and servantesses be of our daughters, and we have not whereof they may be again-bought; and other men have in possession our fields, and our vineries [[or vines]].
NEH 5:6 And I was full wroth, when I had heard the cry of them by these words.
NEH 5:7 And mine heart thought within me, and I blamed the principal men, and magistrates; and I said to them, Ask ye not usuries, or increase, each man of your brethren. And I gathered together a great company against them,
NEH 5:8 and I said to them, As ye know, we have by our power again-bought our brethren Jews, that were sold to heathen men; and ye now sell your brethren, and shall we again-buy them of you? And they held silence, and found not what they should answer.
NEH 5:9 And I said to them, It is not good thing, that ye do; why go ye not in the dread of our God, and reproof be not said to us of heathen men, our enemies?
NEH 5:10 Both I, and my brethren, and my servants, have lent to full many men money and wheat; in common, ask we not for this again; but forgive we alien money, or usury, which is due to us.
NEH 5:11 And again yield ye to them today their fields, and their vineries [[or vines]], their olive places, and their houses; and rather, give ye for them the hundred part of money, and of wheat, of wine, and of oil, which ye were wont to take of them.
NEH 5:12 And they said, We shall yield their goods to them, and we shall ask nothing of them; and we shall do so as thou speakest. And I called the priests, and I made them to swear, that they should do after this, that I had said.
NEH 5:13 And furthermore I shook my bosom, and I said, So God shake away each man from his house, and from his travails, that fulfilleth not this word; and be he shaken away, and be he made void. And all the multitude said, Amen; and they praised God. And the people did, as it was said.
NEH 5:14 Forsooth from that day in which the king had commanded to me, that I should be duke in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year unto the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king, that is, by twelve years, I and my brethren ate not the sustenances which were due to dukes.
NEH 5:15 But the first dukes, that were before me, grieved the people, and took of them in bread, and wine, and money, each day forty shekels; and also their ministers oppressed the people. But I did not so, for the dread of God;
NEH 5:16 but rather I subjected myself, and I builded in the work of the wall, and I bought no field, and all my servants were gathered together with me to the work.
NEH 5:17 Also [[the]] Jews and the magistrates of them, an hundred and fifty men, and they that came to me from heathen men, that be in our compass, were eating in my table.
NEH 5:18 Forsooth by each day one ox was made ready to me, six chosen wethers, besides volatiles, and within ten days diverse wines; and I gave many other things; furthermore and I asked not for the sustenances of my duchy; for the people was made full poor.
NEH 5:19 My God, have thou mind on me into good, by all things which I have done to this people.
NEH 6:1 Forsooth it was done, when San-ballat had heard, and Tobiah, and Geshem of Arabia, and our other enemies, that I had builded the wall, and no more breaking was therein; and unto that time I had not set up the leaves of shutting of the gates;
NEH 6:2 and Sanballat, and Tobiah, and Geshem of Arabia sent to me, and said, Come thou into a field, and smite we bond of peace in villages [[or little towns]]; certainly they thought to do evil to me.
NEH 6:3 Therefore I sent messengers to them, and I said, I make a great work, and I may not go down therefore, lest peradventure it be done recklessly or negligently, when I come, and go down to you.
NEH 6:4 Soothly they sent to me by this word by four times, and I answered to them by the former word.
NEH 6:5 And Sanballat sent to me the fifth time by the former word his child; and he had in his hand a letter,
NEH 6:6 written in this manner; It is heard among heathen men, and Gashmu said, that thou and the Jews think for to rebel, and therefore ye build the wall, and thou wilt raise thee king on them;
NEH 6:7 for which cause also thou hast set prophets, which preach of thee in Jerusalem, and say, A king is in Jerusalem; the king shall hear these words; therefore come thou now, that we take counsel together.
NEH 6:8 And I sent to them, and said, It is not done by these words which thou speakest; for of thine own heart thou makest these things.
NEH 6:9 All these men made us afeared, and thought that our hands should cease from our works, and that we should rest from building; for which cause I strengthened more mine hand thereto.
NEH 6:10 And I entered privily into the house of Shemaiah, the son of Delaiah, the son of Mehetabeel, which said to me, Treat we there with ourselves in the house of God, in the midst of the temple, and close we the gates of the house; for they shall come to slay thee, yea, by night they shall come to slay thee.
NEH 6:11 And I said, Whether any man like to me, that is, trusting so to God, as I do, hath fled for such a thing, and who as I shall enter into the temple, and shall live, or be saved there? I will not enter [[in]]thither.
NEH 6:12 And I understood that God had not sent him, but he spake as prophesying to me; and Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him for meed.
NEH 6:13 For he had taken price, that I should be afeared, and do their will, and that I should do sin; and they should have evil, which they should put to me with shame.
NEH 6:14 Lord, have mind of me, for Tobiah and Sanballat, by such works of them; but also of Noadiah, the prophetess, and of other prophets, that have made me afeared.
NEH 6:15 And the wall was ended in the five and twentieth day of the month of Elul, that is, August, in two and fifty days.
NEH 6:16 And it was done, when all our enemies had heard, that all [[the]] heathen men dreaded us, that were in our compass, and they felled down within themselves, and they knew then, that this work was made of God.
NEH 6:17 But also in those days many letters of the principal men of Jews were sent to Tobiah, and came from Tobiah to them.
NEH 6:18 For many men were in Judah, that had his oath, that is, were sworn to him; for he had wedded the daughter of Shechaniah, the son of Arah; and Johanan, his son, had taken the daughter of Meshullam, the son of Berechiah.
NEH 6:19 But also they praised him before me, and told my words to him; and Tobiah sent letters, to make me afeared.
NEH 7:1 And after that the wall of Jeru-salem was builded, and I had set up the gates thereof, and had numbered the porters, and singers, and deacons [[or Levites]],
NEH 7:2 I commanded to Hanani, my brother, and to Hananiah, the prince of the house of Jerusalem; for he seemed a soothfast man, and dreading God more than other men did;
NEH 7:3 and I said to them, The gates of Jerusalem be not opened till to the heat of the sun; and, when I was yet present, the gates were closed, and locked. And I set keepers thereof of the dwellers of Jerusalem, all men by their whiles, or times, and each man over against his own house.
NEH 7:4 And the city was full broad and great, and little people in the midst thereof, and the houses were not yet builded.
NEH 7:5 And God gave in mine heart, and I gathered together the principal men, and magistrates, and the common people, for to number them; and I found a book of the number[[ing]] of them, that had gone up first from the captivity. And it was found written therein,
NEH 7:6 These be the sons of the province, which went up from the captivity of men passing over from Babylon to Jerusalem, which Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, had led over into Babylon; and they that were come with Zerubbabel turned again into Jerusalem and into Judah, each man to his city;
NEH 7:7 Joshua, that is to say, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Naham-ani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Big-vai, Nehum, Baanah. And the number of the men of the people of Israel is this;
NEH 7:8 the sons of Parosh, two thousand an hundred and two and seventy;
NEH 7:9 the sons of Shephatiah, three hundred and two and seventy;
NEH 7:10 the sons of Arah, six hundred and two and fifty;
NEH 7:11 the sons of Pahathmoab, of the sons of Jeshua and of Joab, two thousand eight hundred and eighteen;
NEH 7:12 the sons of Elam, a thousand eight hundred and four and fifty;
NEH 7:13 the sons of Zattu, eight hundred and five and forty;
NEH 7:14 the sons of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty;
NEH 7:15 the sons of Binnui, six hundred and eight and forty;
NEH 7:16 the sons of Bebai, six hundred and eight and twenty;
NEH 7:17 the sons of Azgad, two thousand three hundred and two and twenty;
NEH 7:18 the sons of Adonikam, six hundred and seven and sixty;
NEH 7:19 the sons of Bigvai, two thousand and seven and sixty;
NEH 7:20 the sons of Adin, six hundred and five and fifty;
NEH 7:21 the sons of Ater, the son of Hezekiah, eight and twenty;
NEH 7:22 the sons of Hashum, three hundred and eight and twenty;
NEH 7:23 the sons of Bezai, three hundred and four and twenty;
NEH 7:24 the sons of Hariph, an hundred and seven and twenty;
NEH 7:25 the sons of Gibeon, five and twenty;
NEH 7:26 the men of Bethlehem and of Netophah, an hundred fourscore and eight;
NEH 7:27 the men of Anathoth, an hundred and eight and twenty;
NEH 7:28 the men of Bethazmaveth, two and forty;
NEH 7:29 the men of Kiriathjearim, of Chephirah, and of Beeroth, seven hundred and three and forty;
NEH 7:30 the men of Ramah and of Gaba, six hundred and one and twenty;
NEH 7:31 the men of Michmas, two hundred and two and twenty;
NEH 7:32 the men of Bethel and of Ai, an hundred and three and twenty;
NEH 7:33 the men of the other Nebo, two and fifty;
NEH 7:34 the men of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred and four and fifty;
NEH 7:35 the sons of Harim, three hundred and twenty;
NEH 7:36 the sons of Jericho, three hundred and five and forty;
NEH 7:37 the sons of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred and one and twenty;
NEH 7:38 the sons of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty;
NEH 7:39 priests; the sons of Jedaiah, in the house of Joshua, nine hundred and four and seventy;
NEH 7:40 the sons of Immer, a thousand and two and fifty;
NEH 7:41 the sons of Pashur, a thousand two hundred and seven and forty;
NEH 7:42 the sons of Harim, a thousand and eighteen;
NEH 7:43 deacons [[or Levites]]; the sons of Joshua, and of Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodevah, four and seventy;
NEH 7:44 singers; the sons of Asaph, an hundred and seven and forty;
NEH 7:45 porters; the sons of Shallum, the sons of Ater, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Akkub, the sons of Hatita, the sons of Shobai, an hundred and eight and thirty;
NEH 7:46 Nethinims; the sons of Ziha, the sons of Hashupha, the sons of Tab-baoth,
NEH 7:47 the sons of Keros, the sons of Sia, the sons of Padon,
NEH 7:48 the sons of Lebana, the sons of Hagaba, the sons of Shalmai,
NEH 7:49 the sons of Hanan, the sons of Giddel, the sons of Gahar,
NEH 7:50 the sons of Reaiah, the sons of Rezin, the sons of Nekoda,
NEH 7:51 the sons of Gazzam, the sons of Uzza, the sons of Phaseah,
NEH 7:52 the sons of Besai, the sons of Meunim, sons of Nephishesim,
NEH 7:53 sons of Bakbuk, sons of Hakupha, sons of Harhur,
NEH 7:54 sons of Bazlith, sons of Mehida, sons of Harsha,
NEH 7:55 sons of Barkos, sons of Sisera, sons of Tamah,
NEH 7:56 sons of Neziah, sons of Hatipha;
NEH 7:57 sons of the servants of Solomon; sons of Sotai, sons of Sophereth, sons of Perida,
NEH 7:58 sons of Jaala, sons of Darkon, sons of Giddel,
NEH 7:59 sons of Shephatiah, sons of Hattil, sons of Pochereth, which were born of Zebaim, and the sons of Amon;
NEH 7:60 all Nethinims, and the sons of the servants of Solomon, were three hun-dred and two and twenty or seventy.
NEH 7:61 And these that follow be they that went up of the country of Telmelah, Telharesha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer; which might not show the house of their fathers, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel;
NEH 7:62 the sons of Delaiah, the sons of Tobiah, the sons of Nekoda, six hundred and two and forty;
NEH 7:63 and of the priests; the sons of Habaiah, the sons of Hakkoz, the sons of Barzillai, that took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai of Gilead, and was called by the name of them;
NEH 7:64 these sought the scripture of their genealogy, and they found it not, and they were therefore cast out of priest-hood.
NEH 7:65 And the Tirshatha said to them, that they should not eat of the holy things of holy men, till that a wise priest rose up among the people.
NEH 7:66 All the multitude as one man, two and forty thousand six hundred and sixty,
NEH 7:67 besides the servants and handmaids of them, which were seven thousand three hundred and seven and thirty; and among [[them]] the singers and sing-eresses, six hundred and five and forty.
NEH 7:68 The horses of them, six hundred and six and thirty; the mules of them, two hundred and five and forty;
NEH 7:69 the camels of them, four hundred and five and thirty; the asses of them, six thousand eight hundred and thirty.
NEH 7:70 Soothly some of the princes of the meines gave costs into the work of God; the Tirshatha gave into the treasure [[or treasury]], a thousand drachmas/drams of gold, fifty vials, or basins, five hundred and thirty coats of priests.
NEH 7:71 And of the princes of [[the]] meines, they gave into the treasure [[or treasury]] of the work, twenty thousand drachmas/ drams of gold, and two thousand and two hundred bezants of silver.
NEH 7:72 And that that the residue people gave, twenty thousand drachmas/drams of gold, and two thousand bezants of silver, and seven and sixty coats of priests.
NEH 7:73 Soothly [[the]] priests, and deacons [[or Levites]], and porters, and singers, and the residue people, and Nethinims, and all Israel dwelled in their cities. And when the seventh month was come under Ezra and Nehemiah, soothly the sons of Israel were in their cities.
NEH 8:1 And all the people was gathered together as one man, to the street which is before the gate of waters. And they said to Ezra, the scribe or writer, that he should bring the book of the law of Moses, which the Lord had commanded to Israel.
NEH 8:2 Therefore Ezra, the priest, brought the law before the multitude of men and of women, and before all that might understand, in the first day of the seventh month.
NEH 8:3 And he read in it openly in the street that was before the gate of waters, from the morrowtide till to midday, in the sight of men and of women, and of wise men; and the ears of all the people were raised up to the book to hear the law.
NEH 8:4 And Ezra the writer stood on the degrees of wood, that he had made to speak upon to the people; and Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah stood beside him, at his right half; and Pedaiah, Mishael, and Malchiah, Hashum, and Hashbadana, and Zechariah, and Meshullam, stood at the left half.
NEH 8:5 And Ezra opened the book before all the people; for he appeared over all the people; and when he had opened the book, all the people stood to hear.
NEH 8:6 And Ezra blessed the Lord God with great voice; and all the people answered, Amen, Amen, raising up their hands. And they were bowed, and they worshipped God, lowly upon the earth.
NEH 8:7 And Jeshua, and Bani, and Shere-biah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodi-jah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Joza-bad, Hanan, Pelaiah, deacons [[or Levites]], made silence in the people, for to hear the law. And the people stood in their degree or place.
NEH 8:8 And they read in the book of God’s law distinctly, and openly, to understand it; and they understood, when it was read.
NEH 8:9 Forsooth Nehemiah said, he is the Tirshatha, and Ezra, the priest and writer, and the deacons [[or Levites]], expounding to all the people, This is a day hallowed to the Lord our God; do not ye mourn, and do not ye weep. For all the people wept, when it heard the words of the law.
NEH 8:10 And he said to them, Go ye, and eat ye fat things, and drink ye wine made sweet with honey, and send ye parts to them, that made not ready to themselves, for it is an holy day of the Lord; do not ye be sorry, for the joy of the Lord is your strength.
NEH 8:11 And the deacons [[or Levites]] made silence in all the people, and said, Be ye still, for this is an holy day, and make ye no sorrow.
NEH 8:12 Therefore all the people went for to eat, and drink, and to send parts, and to make great gladness; for they understood the words, which he had taught them.
NEH 8:13 And in the second day, the princes of meines, and all the peoples, priests, and deacons [[or Levites]], were gathered to Ezra, the writer, that he should expound to them the words of the law.
NEH 8:14 And they found written in the law, that the Lord commanded in the hand of Moses, that the sons of Israel dwell in tabernacles in the solemn days, in the seventh month;
NEH 8:15 and that they preach, and publish a voice in all their cities, and in Jerusalem; and say, Go ye out into the hills, and bring ye boughs of the olive tree, and boughs of the fairest tree, the boughs of a myrtle tree, and the branches of a palm tree, and the boughs of a tree full of wood, that tabernacles be made of the boughs, as it is written.
NEH 8:16 And all the people went out, and they brought with them boughs, and they made to themselves tabernacles, each man in his house roof, and in their streets, either foreyards, and in the large places of God’s house, and in the street of the gate of waters, and in the street of the gate of Ephraim.
NEH 8:17 Therefore all the church, or congregation, of them, that is, the gathering together, that came again from [[the]] captivity, made tabernacles, and they dwelled in those tabernacles. Certainly the sons of Israel had not done such things from the days of Joshua, the son of Nun, unto that day; and full great gladness was there among them.
NEH 8:18 And Ezra read in the book of God’s law by all days of the solemnity, from the first day unto the last day; and they made the solemnity by seven days; and in the eighth day they made a gathering, or collection, of silver, by the custom.
NEH 9:1 Forsooth in the four and twentieth day of this month, the sons of Israel came together in fasting, and in sack-cloths, and earth was on them.
NEH 9:2 And the seed of the sons of Israel was separated from each alien man. And they stood before the Lord, and acknowledged their sins, and the wickednesses of their fathers.
NEH 9:3 And they rose together to stand; and they read in the book of the law of the Lord their God four times in the day, and four times in the night; they acknowledged, and praised the Lord their God.
NEH 9:4 Forsooth they rised [[up]] on the degrees, of deacons [[or Levites]], Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Bunni, Shebaniah, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani. And the deacons [[or Levites]] cried with great voice to their Lord God.
NEH 9:5 And the deacons [[or Levites]], Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, Rise ye, and bless ye the Lord your God, from without beginning and till into without end; and Lord, bless they the high name of thy glory in all blessing and praising.
NEH 9:6 Thou thyself, Lord, art alone, or art alone God; thou madest heaven, and the heaven of heavens, and all the host of those heavens; thou madest the earth and all things that be therein; thou madest the seas and all things that be in them; and thou quickenest all these things; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.
NEH 9:7 Thou thyself art the Lord God, that choosedest Abram, and leddest him out of the fire of Chaldees, and thou settedest, or calledest, his name Abraham;
NEH 9:8 and foundest his heart faithful before thee, and thou hast smitten with him a bond of peace, that thou wouldest give to him the land of Canaanites, of Hittites, of Hivites, of Amorites, and of Perizzites, and of Jebusites, and of Girgashites, that thou wouldest give it to his seed; and thou hast fulfilled thy words, for thou art just.
NEH 9:9 And thou hast seen the torment of our fathers in Egypt, and thou heardest the cry of them upon the Red Sea.
NEH 9:10 And thou hast given signs and great wonders in Pharaoh, and in all his servants, and in all the people of that land; for thou knowest, that they did proudly against our fathers; and thou madest to thee a name, as also in this day.
NEH 9:11 And thou partedest the sea before them, and they passed through the midst of the sea in the dry place; and thou castedest down the pursuers of them into the depth, as a stone in strong waters.
NEH 9:12 And in a pillar of cloud thou were the leader of them by day, and in a pillar of fire by night, that the way, by which they entered, should appear to them.
NEH 9:13 Also thou camest down at the hill of Sinai, and spakest with them from heaven, and thou gavest to them rightful dooms, and the law of truth, ceremonies, and good commandments.
NEH 9:14 And thou showedest to them an hallowed sabbath; and thou command-edest to them commandments, and ceremonies, and law, in the hand of Moses, thy servant.
NEH 9:15 And thou gavest to them bread from heaven in their hunger; and thou leddest out of the stone water to them thirsting; and thou saidest to them, that they should enter, and have in possession the land, upon the which land thou raisedest up thine hand, that thou shouldest give it to them.
NEH 9:16 But they and our fathers did proudly, and made hard their nolls, and heard not thy commandments.
NEH 9:17 And they would not hear; and they had not mind of thy marvels, which thou haddest done to them; and they made hard their nolls; and they gave the head, that they were all-turned to their servage as by strife; but thou art God who is helpful, meek, and merciful, abiding long, either patient, and of much merciful doing, and forsookest not them;
NEH 9:18 and when they had made to them a molten calf, as by strife, and had said, This is thy God, Israel, that led thee out of Egypt, and they did great blasphemies to thy name.
NEH 9:19 But thou, Lord, in thy many mercies leftest, or forsookest, not them in desert; for a pillar of cloud went not away from them by the day, that it should lead them into the way whither they were to go; and the pillar of fire went not away from them by night, that it should show to them the way, by which they should enter.
NEH 9:20 And thou gavest to them thy good Spirit, that taught them; and thou forbadest not thine angel’s meat, or thy manna, from their mouths, and thou gavest to them water in their thirst.
NEH 9:21 Forty years thou feddest them in desert, and nothing failed to them; their clothes waxed not eld, and their feet were not hurt, or swollen.
NEH 9:22 And thou gavest to them realms, and peoples; and thou partedest lots, either heritages, to them, and they had in possession the land of Sihon, and the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og, king of Bashan.
NEH 9:23 And thou multipliedest the sons of them, as the stars of heaven or of the firmament; and thou broughtest them to the land, of which thou saidest to their fathers, that they should enter, and hold it in possession.
NEH 9:24 And the sons of Israel came, and had the land in possession; and before them thou madest low the dwellers of the land, Canaanites; and thou gavest them into the hands of the sons of Israel, and the kings of them, and the peoples of the land, that they did to them, as it pleased them.
NEH 9:25 And they took cities made strong, and fat earth; and they had in possession houses full of all goods, cisterns made of other men, vineries [[or vines]], and places of olives, and many apple trees. And they ate, and were fulfilled, and were made fat; and had plenty of riches in thy great goodness.
NEH 9:26 And yet they stirred thee to wrath-fulness, and went away from thee, and casted away thy law behind their backs; and they killed thy prophets, that witnessed to them, that they should turn again to thee; and they did great blasphemies.
NEH 9:27 And thou gavest them into the hands of their enemies; and they tormented them; and in the time of their tribulation they cried to thee; and thou heardest them from heaven, and by thy many merciful doings thou gavest them saviours, that saved them from the hand of their enemies.
NEH 9:28 And when they had rested, they turned again to do evil in thy sight; and thou forsookest them in the hand of their enemies, and their enemies had them in possession; then they were turned again to thee, and cried to thee; and in thy mercy doing thou heardest them from heaven, and deliveredest them by many times.
NEH 9:29 And thou witnessedest to them, that they should turn again to thy law; but they did proudly, and heard not thy behests, and sinned in thy dooms, which a man that shall do, shall live in those [[or them]]; but they gave their shoulder and went away, and they made hard their nolls, and would not obey to thy dooms.
NEH 9:30 And thou drewest along many years upon them, and thou witnessed-est to them in thy Spirit, by the hand, or telling, of thy prophets, that they were law-breakers; and they heard them not; and therefore thou gavest them into the hand of the peoples of lands.
NEH 9:31 But in thy mercies full many, thou madest not them to be into wasting, neither thou forsookest them; for thou art God of merciful doings, and meek.
NEH 9:32 Now therefore, our Lord God, great God, strong, and fearedful, keeping covenant and mercy, turn thou not away thy face from us in all the travail that hath found us, our kings, and our princes, and our fathers, and our priests, and our prophets, and all thy people, from the days of king Assur till to this day.
NEH 9:33 And Lord, thou art just in all things, that came [[up]] on us, for thou didest truth to us; but we have done wickedly.
NEH 9:34 And our kings, and our princes, and our priests, and our fathers, have not done thy law; and they perceived not thy behests and thy witnessings, which thou hast witnessed in thy behests.
NEH 9:35 And they, in their good realms, and in thy much goodness which thou gavest to them, and in the full large land and fat, which thou haddest given in the sight of them, served not thee, neither turned again from their worst studies.
NEH 9:36 Lo! we ourselves be thralls today; and the land which thou gavest to our fathers, that they should eat the bread thereof, and the goods that be thereof, is thrall; and we ourselves be thralls, either bondmen, in that land.
NEH 9:37 And the fruits thereof be multiplied to kings, which thou hast set [[or put]] upon us for our sins; and they be lords of our bodies, and of our beasts, by their will, and we be in great tribulation.
NEH 9:38 Therefore on all these things we ourselves smite and write bond of peace, and our princes, our deacons [[or Levites]], and our priests aseal.
NEH 10:1 And the sealers were Nehemiah, that is, the Tirshatha, or the governor, the son of Hachaliah, and Zidkijah,
NEH 10:2 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremy [[or Jere-miah]],
NEH 10:3 Pashur, Amariah, Malchijah,
NEH 10:4 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,
NEH 10:5 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
NEH 10:6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,
NEH 10:7 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,
NEH 10:8 Maaziah, Bilgai, and Shemaiah; these were priests.
NEH 10:9 And the deacons [[or Levites]]were Joshua, [[or Jeshua]], the son of Azaniah, Binnui, of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel,
NEH 10:10 and his brethren, Shebaniah, Hodijah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
NEH 10:11 Micha, Rehob, Hashabiah,
NEH 10:12 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,
NEH 10:13 Hodijah, Bani, Beninu.
NEH 10:14 And the chief men of the people were Parosh, Pahathmoab, Elam, Zat-thu, Bani,
NEH 10:15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
NEH 10:16 Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
NEH 10:17 Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur,
NEH 10:18 Hodijah, Hashum, Bezai,
NEH 10:19 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
NEH 10:20 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
NEH 10:21 Meshezabeel, Zadok, Jaddua,
NEH 10:22 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,
NEH 10:23 Hoshea, Hananiah, Hashub,
NEH 10:24 Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek,
NEH 10:25 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
NEH 10:26 Ahijah, Hanan, Anan,
NEH 10:27 Malluch, Harim, Baanah;
NEH 10:28 and others of the people, priests, deacons [[or Levites]], porters, and singers, Nethinims, and all men that separated themselves from the peoples of lands to the law of God, the wives of them, the sons of them, and the daughters of them; all that might understand,
NEH 10:29 promising for their brethren, the principal men of them, and they that came thither to promise, and to swear, that they should go in the law of the Lord, which he gave by the hand of Moses, his servant, and that they should do and keep all the behests of the Lord our God, and his dooms, and his ceremonies;
NEH 10:30 and that we should not give our daughters to the people of the land, and that we should not take their daughters to our sons.
NEH 10:31 Also the peoples of the land, that bring in things set to sale, and all things to use, by the day of sabbath, for to sell, we shall not take of them in the sabbath, and in a day hallowed; and we shall leave the land without tilth and sowing and gathering, the seventh year, and the asking of all hand, that is, release debts, and deliver Hebrew servants.
NEH 10:32 And also we shall ordain upon us commandments, that by each year we give the third part of a shekel to the work of the Lord our God,
NEH 10:33 to the loaves of setting forth, and to the everlasting sacrifice, and into burnt sacrifice everlasting, in sabbaths, in calends, that is, beginnings of months, in solemnities, in hallowed days, and for sin, that prayer be made for Israel, and into all the uses of the house of our God.
NEH 10:34 Also we casted lots on the offering of wood, betwixt priests and deacons [[or Levites]] and the people, that those [[or they]] should be brought into the house of our God, by the meines of our fathers in certain times, from the times of a year sufficient unto a year, that that wood should burn upon the altar of the Lord our God, as it is written in the law of Moses;
NEH 10:35 and that we bring the first engen-dered things of our land, and the first fruits of all fruit of each tree, from year into year, into the house of the Lord,
NEH 10:36 and the first begotten things of our sons, and of our beasts, as it is written in the law, and the first begotten things of our oxen, and of our sheep, that those [[or they]] be offered in the house of our God, to priests that minister in the house of our God;
NEH 10:37 and we shall bring the first fruits of our meats, and of our moist [[or liquor]] sacrifices, and the fruits of each tree, and of vintage, and of oil, to [[the]] priests, at the chamber of the house of the Lord, and the tenth part of our land to deacons [[or Levites]]; those deacons shall take tithes of all the cities of our works.
NEH 10:38 And a priest, the son of Aaron, shall be with the deacons [[or Levites]] in the tithes of deacons; and the deacons shall offer the tenth part of their tithe in the house of our God, at the chambers, in the house of treasure.
NEH 10:39 For the sons of Israel and the sons of Levi shall bring the first fruits of wheat, of wine, and of oil to that place; and hallowed vessels shall be there, and priests, and singers, and porters, and ministers; and we shall not forsake the house of our God.
NEH 11:1 Forsooth the princes of the people dwelled in Jerusalem; but the residue people sent lot, for to take one part of ten, which should dwell in Jerusalem, in the holy city; and the other nine parts dwelled in other cities.
NEH 11:2 And the people blessed all men, that proffered themselves by free will to dwell in Jerusalem.
NEH 11:3 And so these be the princes of the province, that dwelled in Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah; and each man dwelled in his possession, in their cities of Israel, that is, priests, deacons [[or Levites]], Nethinims, and the sons of the servants of Solomon.
NEH 11:4 And men of the sons of Judah, and of the sons of Benjamin dwelled in Jerusalem; of the sons of Judah; Athaiah, the son of Uzziah, son of Zechariah, son of Amariah, son of Shephatiah, son of Mahalaleel, of the sons of Perez;
NEH 11:5 Maaseiah, the son of Baruch, the son of Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of Shilonites;
NEH 11:6 all the sons of Perez, that dwelled in Jerusalem, were four hundred eight and sixty, strong men.
NEH 11:7 And these be the sons of Benjamin; Sallu, the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jesaiah;
NEH 11:8 and after him Gabbai, Sallai, ninety and eight and twenty;
NEH 11:9 and Joel, the son of Zichri, was the sovereign of them, and Judah, the son of Senuah, was the second man on the city.
NEH 11:10 And of priests; Jedaiah, the son of Joiarib, Jachin,
NEH 11:11 Seraiah, the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, these were princes of the house of God,
NEH 11:12 and their brethren, making the works of the temple, were eight hundred and two and twenty. And Adaiah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchiah,
NEH 11:13 and the brethren of them, the princes of fathers, were two hundred and two and forty. And Amashai, the son of Azareel, the son of Ahasai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,
NEH 11:14 and their brethren, full mighty men, were an hundred and eight and twenty; and the sovereign of them was Zabdiel, the son of mighty men.
NEH 11:15 And of deacons [[or Levites]]; Shemaiah, the son of Hashub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;
NEH 11:16 and Shabbethai, and Jozabad was ordained of the princes of deacons [[or Levites]], upon all the works that were done withoutforth in God’s house.
NEH 11:17 And Mattaniah, the son of Micha, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, was prince in God’s house, to praise and acknowledge to him in prayer; and Bakbukiah was the second of his brethren, and Abda, the son of Sham-mua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.
NEH 11:18 All the deacons [[or Levites]] in the holy city, were two hundred fourscore and four.
NEH 11:19 And the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and the brethren of them, that kept the doors of the temple, were an hundred and two and seventy.
NEH 11:20 And other men of Israel, priests, and deacons [[or Levites]], in all the cities of Judah, each man in his possession.
NEH 11:21 And [[the]] Nethinims, that dwelled in Ophel; and Ziha and Gishpa of [[the]] Nethinims.
NEH 11:22 And sovereign of deacons [[or Levites]] in Jerusalem was Uzzi, the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micha. Of the sons of Asaph, singers in the service of God’s house.
NEH 11:23 For the command of the king was on them, and an order was in singers by all days;
NEH 11:24 and Pethahiah, the son of Meshe-zabeel, of the sons of Zerah, the son of Judah, in the hand of the king, by each word of the people;
NEH 11:25 and in the houses by all the countries of them. Of the sons of Judah dwelled in Kiriatharba, and in the villages thereof, and in Dibon, and in the villages thereof, and in Jekabzeel, and in the towns thereof;
NEH 11:26 and in Jeshua, and in Moladah, and in Bethphelet,
NEH 11:27 and in Hazarshual, and in Beer-sheba, and in the villages thereof;
NEH 11:28 and in Ziklag, and in Mekonah, and in the villages thereof;
NEH 11:29 and in Enrimmon, and in Zareah, and in Jarmuth,
NEH 11:30 in Zanoah, in Adullam, and in the towns thereof; in Lachish, and in the country thereof; in Azekah, and in the villages thereof; and they dwelled in Beersheba till to the valley of Hinnom.
NEH 11:31 And the sons of Benjamin dwelled in Geba, Michmash, and Aija, and Bethel, and in the villages thereof;
NEH 11:32 in Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,
NEH 11:33 Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,
NEH 11:34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,
NEH 11:35 Lod, and in Ono, the valley of craftsmen.
NEH 11:36 And of the deacons [[or Levites]], the portions of Judah and of Benjamin.
NEH 12:1 Soothly these were[[the]] priests and [[the]] deacons [[or Levites]], that went up with Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, and with Joshua; Seraiah, Jeremy [[or Jeremiah]], Ezra,
NEH 12:2 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,
NEH 12:3 Shechaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,
NEH 12:4 Iddo, Ginnetho, Miamin,
NEH 12:5 Abiah, Maadiah, Bilgah,
NEH 12:6 Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah,
NEH 12:7 Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, and Jedaiah; these were the princes of priests and their brethren, in the days of Jeshua.
NEH 12:8 Certainly deacons [[or Levites]]; Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, Mattaniah, were over the hymns, they and their brethren;
NEH 12:9 and Bakbukiah, and Unni, and the brethren of them, each man in his office.
NEH 12:10 And Jeshua begat Joiakim, and Joiakim begat Eliashib, and Eliashib begat Joiada,
NEH 12:11 and Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat Jaddua.
NEH 12:12 And in the days of Joiakim these were the priests, and the princes of the meines of priests; Seraiah, Meraiah; Jeremy, Hananiah;
NEH 12:13 of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;
NEH 12:14 of Melicu, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;
NEH 12:15 of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;
NEH 12:16 of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;
NEH 12:17 of Abiah, Zichri; of Miniamin, (); and of Moadiah, Piltai;
NEH 12:18 of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;
NEH 12:19 of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;
NEH 12:20 of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;
NEH 12:21 of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethaneel.
NEH 12:22 Deacons [[or Levites]] in the days of Eliashib, and of Joiada, and of Johanan, and of Jaddua, were written princes of meines, and priests, in the realm of Darius king of Persia.
NEH 12:23 The sons of Levi, princes of meines, were written in the book of the words of days, and unto the days of Johanan, the son of Eliashib.
NEH 12:24 And the princes of deacons [[or Levites]]were Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua, the son of Kadmiel; and the brethren of them by their whiles, or times, that they should praise and acknowledge by the commandment of king David, the man of God, and they should keep evenly by order.
NEH 12:25 Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, and Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, were keepers of the gates, and of the porches before the gates.
NEH 12:26 These men were serving in the days of Joiakim, the son of Joshua, son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah, the duke, and of Ezra, the priest and writer.
NEH 12:27 Forsooth in the hallowing of the wall of Jerusalem they sought deacons [[or Levites]] of all their places, to bring them into Jerusalem, and to make the hallowing in gladness, in the doing of thankings, and in song, and in cymbals, and in psalteries, and in harps.
NEH 12:28 And the sons of singers were gathered together, both from the field places about Jerusalem, and from the towns of Netophathi,
NEH 12:29 and from the house of Gilgal, and from the country of Geba, and of Azmaveth; for the singers had builded towns to themselves in the compass of Jerusalem.
NEH 12:30 And [[the]] priests and deacons [[or Levites]] were cleansed, and then they cleansed the people, and the gates, and the wall.
NEH 12:31 And I made the princes of Judah to go up on the wall, and I ordained two great choirs, or companies, of men praising the Lord; and they went to the right side on the wall, to the gate of the dunghill.
NEH 12:32 And Hoshaiah went after them, and the half part of the princes of Judah,
NEH 12:33 and Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,
NEH 12:34 Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemai-ah, and Jeremy [[or Jeremiah]].
NEH 12:35 And of the sons of priests singing in trumps; Zechariah, the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Michaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph.
NEH 12:36 And his brethren; Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethaneel, and Judah, and Hanani, in the instruments of song of David, the man of God; and Ezra, the writer, before them,
NEH 12:37 in the gate of the well. And men went up against them, in the degrees of the city of David, in the ascending or going up of the wall, over the house of David, and unto the gate of the waters at the east coast.
NEH 12:38 And the second choir of men telling out thankings went over against, or on the other side, and I went after them; and half part of the people was on the wall, and on the tower of ovens, and they went unto the broadest wall;
NEH 12:39 and over the gate of Ephraim, and over the eld [[or old]] gate, and over the gate of fishes, and over the tower of Hananeel, and over the tower of Meah, and they came unto the gate of flock; and they stood still in the gate of keeping.
NEH 12:40 And the two choirs of men praising stood in the house of God, and I and the half part of magistrates with me.
NEH 12:41 And the priests, Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Michaiah, Elioenai, Zech-ariah, Hananiah, in trumps;
NEH 12:42 and Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer; and the singers sang clearly, and Jezrahiah, their sovereign also.
NEH 12:43 And they offered in that day great sacrifices, and were glad; for God had made them glad with great gladness. But also their wives and their lawful children were joyful, and the gladness of Jerusalem was heard [[a]] far.
NEH 12:44 Also they numbered in that day the men that were over the keeping places of the treasure, to receive moist [[or liquor]] sacrifices, and the first fruits, and tithes, that in seemliness, or fairness, of doing of thankings to the Lord, princes of the city should bring in by them, for the priests and deacons [[or Levites]]; for Judah was glad in priests and deacons present.
NEH 12:45 And they kept the keeping of their God, the keeping of cleansing; and singers, and porters, by the command-ment of David, and of Solomon, his son;
NEH 12:46 for in the days of David and of Asaph, from the beginning, princes of singers were ordained, praising in song, and acknowledging to God.
NEH 12:47 And all Israel, in the days of Zerubbabel, and in the days of Nehemiah, gave parts to singers and to porters, by all the days; and they hallowed a part for the deacons [[or Levites]], and the deacons hallowed a part for the sons of Aaron.
NEH 13:1 Forsooth in that day it was read in the book of Moses, in hearing of the people; and it was found written therein, that Ammonites and Moabites owe not to enter into the church of God till into without end;
NEH 13:2 for they met not the sons of Israel with bread and water, and they hired against the sons of Israel Balaam, for to curse them; and our God turned the cursing into blessing.
NEH 13:3 And it was done, when the people had heard the law, they separated each alien from Israel.
NEH 13:4 And upon these things was Eliashib, the priest, that was sovereign in the chamber of the house of our God, and was the neighbour of Tobiah.
NEH 13:5 Therefore he made to him a great chamber in the house of God; and there before him were men that kept the gifts that were offered, and incense, and diverse vessels, and the tithe of wheat, of wine, and of oil, and the parts of deacons [[or Levites]], and of singers, and of porters, and the first fruits of priests.
NEH 13:6 And in all these things I was not in Jerusalem; for in the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes, king of Babylon, I came to the king, and in the end of days I prayed the king.
NEH 13:7 And I came into Jerusalem, and I understood the evil that Eliashib had done to Tobiah, to make to him a chamber in the porches of God’s house;
NEH 13:8 and to me it seemed full evil. And I casted forth the vessels of the house of Tobiah out of the chamber;
NEH 13:9 and I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers; and I brought again there the vessels of God’s house, and the sacrifice thereof, and the incense.
NEH 13:10 And I knew that the parts of the deacons [[or Levites]] were not given to them, and that each man of the deacons and of the singers, and of them that ministered in the temple, had gone away into his country;
NEH 13:11 and I did the cause against magi-strates, and I said, Why have ye forsaken the house of God? And I gathered them together, that is, deacons or Levites and the ministers, that had gone away, and I made them to stand in their standings.
NEH 13:12 And all Judah brought the tithe of wheat, of wine, and of oil, into the barns.
NEH 13:13 And we ordained on the barns, Shelemiah, the priest, and Zadok, the writer, and Pedaiah, one of the deacons [[or Levites]], and besides them we ordained Hanan, the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah; for they were proved faithful men, and the parts of their brethren were betaken to them.
NEH 13:14 My God, have mind of me for this thing, and do thou not away my merciful doings, which I have done in the house of my God, and in his ceremonies.
NEH 13:15 In those days I saw in Judah men treading pressers in the sabbath, men bringing in heaps, and charging or loading on asses wine, and grapes, and figs, and all burdens, and bringing into Jerusalem in the day of sabbath; and I witnessed to them, that they should sell in the day in which it was leaveful to sell.
NEH 13:16 And men of Tyre dwelled in it, and brought in fishes, and all things set to sale, and they sold in the sabbaths to the sons of Judah, and of Jerusalem.
NEH 13:17 And I rebuked the principal men of Judah, and I said to them, What is this evil thing that ye do, and make unholy the day of the sabbath?
NEH 13:18 Whether our fathers did not these things, and our God brought on us all this evil, and on this city? and ye increase wrathfulness on Israel, in defouling the sabbath.
NEH 13:19 And it was done, when the gates of Jerusalem had rested in the day of sabbath, I said, Shut ye the gates; and they shutted the gates; and I com-manded, that they should not open the gates till after the sabbath. And of my children, or servants, I ordained numbers on the gates to keep shut, that no man should bring in a burden in the day of sabbath.
NEH 13:20 And merchants, and men selling all things set to sale, dwelled without Jerusalem once or twice.
NEH 13:21 And I areasoned with them, and I said to them, Why dwell ye there even against, or on the other side of, the wall? If ye do this thing the second time, I shall set hand on you. Therefore from that time forth they came not thither in the sabbath.
NEH 13:22 Also I said to the deacons [[or Levites]], that they should be cleansed, and that they should come to keep the gates, and to hallow the day of sabbath. And therefore for this thing, my God, have mind of me, and spare me by the muchliness of thy merciful doings.
NEH 13:23 But also in those days I saw Jews wedding wives, women of Ashdod, and women of Ammonites, and women of Moabites.
NEH 13:24 And their children spake half part by the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak by the speech of Jews, and they spake by the language of this people, and of that people.
NEH 13:25 And I rebuked them, and cursed them; and I beat the men of them, and I made them bald, and I made them swear by the Lord, that they should not give their daughters to the sons of those aliens, and that they should not take of the daughters of those aliens to their sons, and to themselves;
NEH 13:26 and I said, Whether Solomon, the king of Israel, sinned not in such things? And certainly in many folks there was no king like him, and he was loved of his God, and God setted [[or set]] him king upon all Israel, and alien women brought him to sin.
NEH 13:27 Whether also we unobedient, should do all this great evil, that we trespass against our Lord God, and wed alien wives?
NEH 13:28 Forsooth Sanballat the Horonite had wedded a daughter of the sons of Joiada, son of Eliashib, the great priest, which Sanballat I drove away from me.
NEH 13:29 My Lord God, have mind against them, that defoul priesthood, and the right of priests, and of deacons [[or Levites]].
NEH 13:30 Therefore I cleansed them from all aliens, and I ordained the orders of priests and of deacons [[or Levites]], each man in his service,
NEH 13:31 and in offering, that is, dressing, of trees, or of wood, to burn with offered sacrifices, in times ordained, and in the first fruits. My God, have mind of me into good.
JOB 1:1 In the land of Uz was a man that was called Job; and that man was simple, that is, without guile, and rightful [[or right]], and dreading God, and going away from evil.
JOB 1:2 And there were seven sons and three daughters born to him;
JOB 1:3 and his possession was seven thousand of sheep, and three thousand of camels, and five hundred yokes of oxen, and five hundred of female asses, and full much household; and this Job was a great man among all the men of the east.
JOB 1:4 And his sons went, and made feasts by their houses, each man in his day; and they sent, and called their three sisters, to eat, and to drink wine with them.
JOB 1:5 And when the days of feast had passed into the world, that is, in the end of the week, Job sent to them, and hallowed them, and he rose early, and offered burnt sacrifices by all. For he said, Lest peradventure my sons do sin, and curse God in their hearts, [[or Lest peradventure my sons sin, and bless][to God in their hearts]]. Job did so in all days.
JOB 1:6 And in a day, when the sons of God were come to be present before the Lord, also Satan came among them.
JOB 1:7 To whom the Lord said, From whence comest thou? And Satan answered, and said, I have compassed the earth, and I have walked through it.
JOB 1:8 And the Lord said to him, Whether thou hast beheld my servant Job, that there is no man in [[the]] earth like him; he is a simple man, and rightful [[or right]], and dreading God, and going away from evil?
JOB 1:9 To whom Satan answered, Whether Job dreadeth God vainly?
JOB 1:10 Whether thou hast not encom-passed him, and his house, and all his chattel by compass? Thou hast blessed the works of his hands, and his possession is increased on [[the]] earth.
JOB 1:11 But stretch forth thine hand a little, and touch thou all things that he hath in possession, taking them away, or extinguishing them; and if he curse not thee in the face, he is verily simple, and rightwise, and dreading thee.
JOB 1:12 Therefore the Lord said to Satan, Lo! all things, which he hath, be in thine hand; only stretch thou not forth thine hand into him. And Satan went out from the face of the Lord.
JOB 1:13 And when in a day the sons of Job and his daughters ate, and drank wine in the house of their first begot-ten brother,
JOB 1:14 a messenger came to Job, and said to him, Thine oxen eared, and thy female asses [[were]] pastured beside them;
JOB 1:15 and Sabeans felled in, and took away all things, and smited the children or servants with sword; and I alone escaped to tell to thee.
JOB 1:16 And when he spake yet, another came, and said, [[The]] Fire of God came down from heaven, and wasted [[the]] sheep, and smote thy children or servants; and I alone escaped for to tell to thee.
JOB 1:17 But yet the while he spake, also another came, and said, Chaldees made three companies, and assailed the camels, and took those [[or them]] away, and they have killed thy servants with sword; and I alone escaped to tell to thee.
JOB 1:18 And yet while he spake, lo! another entered, and said, While thy sons and daughters ate, and drank wine in the house of their first begotten brother,
JOB 1:19 a great wind felled in suddenly from the coast of desert, and shook [[the]] four corners of the house, which felled down, and oppressed thy children, and they be dead; and I alone fled to tell to thee.
JOB 1:20 Then Job rose up, and he rent his clothes, and when his head was polled, he felled down upon the earth, and he worshipped God,
JOB 1:21 and said, I went naked out of the womb of my mother, and naked I shall turn again thither; the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; as it pleased the Lord, so be it done; the name of the Lord be blessed.
JOB 1:22 In all these things Job sinned not in his lips, neither spake any folly thing against God.
JOB 2:1 And it was done, in a day the sons of God were come to praise him, and they stood before the Lord, and Satan was come among them, and he stood in the sight of the Lord,
JOB 2:2 and the Lord said to Satan, From whence comest thou? Which answered, and said, I have compassed the earth, and I have gone through it.
JOB 2:3 And the Lord said to Satan, Whether thou hast not considered my servant Job, that none in [[the]] earth is like him; he is a simple man, and rightful [[or right]], and dreading God, and going away from evil, and yet holding innocence? But thou hast moved me against him, that I should torment or vex him in vain.
JOB 2:4 To whom Satan answered, and said, A man shall give skin for skin, and all things that he hath for his life;
JOB 2:5 therefore put to thine hand, and touch his bone and his flesh, and then thou shalt see, that he shall curse thee in thy face.
JOB 2:6 Therefore the Lord said to Satan, Lo! he is in thine hand; nevertheless keep thou his life.
JOB 2:7 Therefore Satan went out from the face of the Lord, and he smote Job with the worst stinking botch, from the sole of his foot till to his top;
JOB 2:8 and Job sat in a dunghill, and he shaved away the quitter or pus of him with a shell.
JOB 2:9 Forsooth his wife said to him, Dwellest thou yet in thy simpleness, that is, fondness or foolishness? Curse thou God, and die.
JOB 2:10 And Job said to her, Thou hast spoken as one of the fond [[or foolish]] women; if we have taken goods of the hand of the Lord, why forsooth suffer we not evils? In all these things Job sinned not in his lips.
JOB 2:11 And then three friends of Job heard of all the evil that had befallen to him, and they came to him, each of them from his place, Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; for they had said together to themselves, that they would come together, and visit Job, and comfort him.
JOB 2:12 And when they had raised afar their eyes, they knew not him; and they cried [[out]], and wept, and rent their clothes, and sprinkled dust on their heads into heaven.
JOB 2:13 And they sat with him in the earth seven days and seven nights, and no man spake a word to him; for they saw, that his sorrow was great.
JOB 3:1 After these things Job opened his mouth, and cursed his day,
JOB 3:2 and he said,
JOB 3:3 Perish the day in which I was born, and the night in which it was said, A man is conceived.
JOB 3:4 That day be turned into darknesses; God seek not it [[from]] above, and be it not in mind, neither be it lightened with light.
JOB 3:5 Darkness make it dark, and the shadow of death and of mist occupy it; and be it wrapped with bitterness.
JOB 3:6 Dark whirlwind hold that night; be it not reckoned among the days of the year, neither be it numbered among the months.
JOB 3:7 That night be sullen, and not worthy of praising.
JOB 3:8 Curse they it, that curse the day, that be ready to raise Leviathan.
JOB 3:9 [[The]] Stars of that night be they made dark with the darkness thereof; abide it light, and see it not, neither see it the beginning of the morrow-tide rising up.
JOB 3:10 For it closed not the doors of the womb, that bare me, neither it took away evil from mine eyes.
JOB 3:11 Why was not I dead in the womb? why went I out of the womb, and perished not anon?
JOB 3:12 Why was I taken on knees? why was I given suck with teats?
JOB 3:13 For now I sleeping should be still, and I should rest in my sleep,
JOB 3:14 with kings and counsellors of the earth, which build to them sullen places;
JOB 3:15 either with princes that have gold in possession, and fill their houses with silver;
JOB 3:16 either as a child, or a beast, born before the time, and hid, I should not have been; either as they that be conceived, and saw not light.
JOB 3:17 There wicked men ceased of making noise, and there men made weary of strength rested.
JOB 3:18 And sometime men bound together now be without dis-ease, they heard not the voice of the wrongful asker.
JOB 3:19 A little man and a great man be there, and a servant is free from his lord.
JOB 3:20 Why is light given to the wretch, and life to them that be in bitterness of soul?
JOB 3:21 Which abide death, and it cometh not; as men that dig out treasure,
JOB 3:22 and joy greatly, when they have found a sepulchre?
JOB 3:23 Why is light given to a man, whose way is hid, and God hath encompassed him with darknesses?
JOB 3:24 Before that I eat, I sigh; and as of water flowing, so is my roaring.
JOB 3:25 For the dread, which I dreaded, hath come to me; and that thing, that I shamed [[of]], hath befallen to me.
JOB 3:26 Whether I dissembled or feigned not? whether I was not still? whether I rested not? and yet indignation hath come [[up]] on me.
JOB 4:1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answer-ed, and said,
JOB 4:2 If we begin to speak to thee, in hap thou shalt take it heavily; but who may hold a word conceived?
JOB 4:3 Lo! thou hast taught full many men, and thou hast strengthened hands made faint.
JOB 4:4 Thy words have confirmed men doubting, and thou hast comforted knees trembling.
JOB 4:5 But now a wound is come upon thee, and thou hast failed, or fainted; it hath touched thee, and thou art troubled.
JOB 4:6 Where is thy dread, thy strength, and thy patience, and the perfection of thy ways?
JOB 4:7 I beseech thee, have thou mind, what innocent man perished ever, either when rightful [[or rightwise]] men were done away?
JOB 4:8 Certainly rather I saw them, that work wickedness, and sow sorrows, and reap those [[or them]],
JOB 4:9 to have perished by God blowing, and to be wasted by the spirit of his ire.
JOB 4:10 The roaring of a lion, and the voice of a lioness, and the teeth of whelps of lions, be all-broken.
JOB 4:11 Tigers perished, for she had not prey; and [[the]] whelps of the lion be destroyed.
JOB 4:12 Certainly an hid word was said to me, and mine ear took as it were thief-like the veins of the privy speak-ing thereof.
JOB 4:13 In the hideousness of [[the]] night’s sight, when heavy sleep is wont to occupy men,
JOB 4:14 dread and trembling held me; and all my bones were afeared.
JOB 4:15 And when the spirit went in my presence, the hairs of my flesh had hideousness.
JOB 4:16 One stood, whose cheer, or likeness, I knew not, an image before mine eyes; and I heard a voice as of [[a]] soft wind.
JOB 4:17 Whether a man shall be made just [[or justified]] in comparison of God? either a man shall be cleaner than his Maker?
JOB 4:18 Lo! they that serve him be not steadfast; and he hath found shrewd-ness in his angels.
JOB 4:19 How much more they that dwell in houses of clay, which have an earthly foundament, shall be wasted as of a moth.
JOB 4:20 From morrowtide till to eventide they shall be cut down; and for no man understandeth, they shall perish without end.
JOB 4:21 And they, that be left, shall be taken away; they shall die, and not in wisdom.
JOB 5:1 Therefore, Job, call thou, if there is any man that shall answer thee, and turn thou to some of [[the]] saints.
JOB 5:2 Wrathfulness slayeth a fond [[or foolish]] man, and envy slayeth a little child.
JOB 5:3 I saw a fool with [[a]] steadfast root, and I cursed his fairness anon.
JOB 5:4 His sons shall be made far from health, and they shall be defouled in the gate, and there shall be none that shall deliver them.
JOB 5:5 Whose ripe corn an hungry man shall eat, and an armed man shall ravish him, and they, that thirst, shall drink his riches.
JOB 5:6 Nothing is done in [[the]] earth with-out cause, and sorrow shall not go out of the earth, that is, adversity befalleth not to any man without cause.
JOB 5:7 A man is born to labour, and a bird to flight.
JOB 5:8 Wherefore I shall beseech the Lord, and I shall set [[or put]] my speech to my God.
JOB 5:9 That maketh great things, and that may not be sought out, and wonder-ful things without number.
JOB 5:10 The which God giveth rain upon the face of the earth, and moisteth all things with waters.
JOB 5:11 Which setteth meek men on high, and raiseth with health them that mourn.
JOB 5:12 Which destroyeth the thoughts of evil-willed men, that their hands may not fulfill those things that they have begun.
JOB 5:13 Which taketh sly cautelous men in their own fellness, and he destroyeth the counsel of shrews or the depraved.
JOB 5:14 By day they shall run into dark-nesses, and as in night, so they shall grope in midday.
JOB 5:15 Certainly God shall make safe a needy man from the sword of their mouth, and a poor man from the hand of the violent, either raveners.
JOB 5:16 And hope shall be to a needy man, but wickedness shall draw together his mouth.
JOB 5:17 Blessed is the man, which is chastised of the Lord; therefore reprove thou not the blaming of the Lord.
JOB 5:18 For he woundeth, and doeth medicine; he smiteth, and his hands shall make whole.
JOB 5:19 In six tribulations he shall deliver thee, and in the seventh tribulation evil shall not touch thee.
JOB 5:20 In hunger he shall deliver thee from death, and in battle from the power of sword.
JOB 5:21 Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of an evil tongue, and thou shalt not dread mis-ease, either wretchedness, when it cometh.
JOB 5:22 In destroying made of enemies and in hunger thou shalt laugh, and thou shalt not dread the beasts of [[the]] earth.
JOB 5:23 But thy covenant shall be with the stones of earth, and beasts of earth shall be peaceable to thee.
JOB 5:24 And thou shalt know, that thy tabernacle hath peace, and thou visiting thy fairness, that is, beholding thy prosperity, shalt not sin.
JOB 5:25 And thou shalt know also, that thy seed shall be manyfold, and thy generation shall be as an herb of [[the]] earth.
JOB 5:26 In abundance of years thou shalt go into the sepulchre, as an heap of wheat is borne [[in]] in his time.
JOB 5:27 Lo! this thing is so, as we have sought; the which thing when thou hast heard, treat it in thy mind.
JOB 6:1 And Job answered, and said,
JOB 6:2 I would, that my sins, by which I have deserved the wrath of God, and the wretchedness which I suffer, were weighed in a balance.
JOB 6:3 As the gravel of the sea, this wretchedness should appear more grievous; wherefore and my words be full of sorrow.
JOB 6:4 For the arrows of the Lord be in me, the indignation of which drinketh up my spirit; and the dreads of the Lord fight against me.
JOB 6:5 Whether a field ass shall roar, when he hath grass? Either whether an ox shall low, when he standeth before a full cratch?
JOB 6:6 Either whether a thing unsavory may be eaten, which is not made savory by salt? Either whether any man may taste a thing, which tasted bringeth death? For why to an hungry soul, yea, bitter things seem to be sweet;
JOB 6:7 those things which my soul would not touch before, be now my meats for anguish.
JOB 6:8 Who giveth, or granteth, that mine asking come to me; and that God give to me that thing, that I abide?
JOB 6:9 And he that hath begun to punish, all-break he me; loose he his hand, and cut he me down?
JOB 6:10 And this be comfort to me, that he torment me with sorrow, and spare not, and that I against-say not the words of the Holy.
JOB 6:11 For what is my strength, that I suffer? either which is mine end, that I suffer it patiently?
JOB 6:12 Neither my strength is the strength of stones, neither my flesh is of brass.
JOB 6:13 Lo! none help is to me in me; and also my necessary friends parted from me.
JOB 6:14 He that taketh away mercy from his friend, forsaketh the dread of the Lord.
JOB 6:15 My brethren passed from me, as a strand [[or stream]]doeth, that passeth by rushingly in great valleys.
JOB 6:16 Snow shall come upon them, that dread frost.
JOB 6:17 In the time wherein they be scattered, they shall perish; and when they shall wax hot, they shall be loosed from their place.
JOB 6:18 The paths of their steps be enwrapped; they shall go in vain, and shall perish.
JOB 6:19 Behold ye the paths of Tema, and the ways of Sheba; and abide ye a little.
JOB 6:20 They be shamed, for I hoped; and they came unto me, and they be covered with shame.
JOB 6:21 Now ye be come, and now ye see my wound, and dread.
JOB 6:22 Whether I said, Bring ye to me, and give ye of your chattel to me?
JOB 6:23 either said, Deliver ye me from the hand of mine enemy, and draw away ye me from the hand of strong men?
JOB 6:24 Teach ye me, and I shall be still; and if in hap I unknew anything, teach ye me.
JOB 6:25 Why have ye contraried the words of truth? since there is none of you, that may reprove me.
JOB 6:26 Ye make ready speeches only for to blame, and ye bring forth words into wind.
JOB 6:27 Ye fall in on a fatherless child, and endeavour to pervert your friend.
JOB 6:28 Nevertheless fulfill ye that, that ye have begun; and give ye your ear, or hearing, and see ye, whether I lie.
JOB 6:29 I beseech you, answer ye me with-out strife, and speak ye, and deem ye that, that is just [[or rightwise]].
JOB 6:30 And ye shall not find wickedness in my tongue, neither folly shall sound in my cheeks.
JOB 7:1 Knighthood, that is, continual travail, and fighting against vices, is the life of a man upon earth, and his days be as the days of an hired man.
JOB 7:2 As an hart desireth shadow, and as an hired man abideth the end of his work;
JOB 7:3 so I have had void months, and I have numbered travailous nights to me.
JOB 7:4 If I shall sleep, I shall say, When shall I rise? and again I shall abide the eventide, and I shall be full-filled with sorrows unto darknesses come.
JOB 7:5 My flesh is clothed with rot, and filths of dust; my skin dried up, and is drawn together.
JOB 7:6 My days have passed swifter than a web is cut down from the looms; and those days be wasted without any hope of coming again.
JOB 7:7 God, have thou mind, for my life is wind, and mine eye shall not turn again, that it see goods.
JOB 7:8 Neither the sight of man shall behold me; but thine eyes be in me, and I shall not be in deadly life, that is, I shall not abide alive.
JOB 7:9 As a cloud is wasted, and passeth soon away, so he that goeth down to hell, shall not go up from thence;
JOB 7:10 neither he shall turn again more into his house, and his place shall no more know him.
JOB 7:11 Wherefore and I shall not spare my mouth; I shall speak in the tribulation of my spirit, I shall talk altogether with the bitterness of my soul.
JOB 7:12 Whether I am a sea, either a whale, for thou hast encompassed me with a prison?
JOB 7:13 If I shall say, My bed shall comfort me, and I shall be relieved, or quieted, speaking with me in my bed;
JOB 7:14 thou shalt make me afeared by dreams, and thou shalt shake me with horror, either hideousness, by sights.
JOB 7:15 Wherefore my soul chose hanging, and my bones have chosen death.
JOB 7:16 I despaired, now I shall no more live; Lord, spare thou me, for my days be nought.
JOB 7:17 What is a man, for thou magni-fiest him? either what settest thou thine heart toward him?
JOB 7:18 Thou visitest him early, and suddenly thou provest him.
JOB 7:19 How long sparest thou not me, neither sufferest me, that I swallow my spittle?
JOB 7:20 I have sinned; O! thou keeper of men, what shall I do to thee? Why hast thou set me contrary to thee, and I am made grievous to myself?
JOB 7:21 Why doest thou not away my sin, and why takest thou not away my wickedness? Lo! now I shall sleep in dust, and if thou seekest me early, I shall not abide.
JOB 8:1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answer-ed, and said,
JOB 8:2 How long shalt thou speak such things? The spirit of the word of thy mouth is manyfold.
JOB 8:3 Whether God supplanteth, either deceiveth, doom, and whether Almighty God destroyeth that, that is just [[or rightwise]]?
JOB 8:4 Yea, though thy sons sinned against him, and he left them in the hand of their wickedness;
JOB 8:5 nevertheless, if thou risest early to God, and beseechest Almighty God,
JOB 8:6 if thou goest clean and rightful, anon he shall wake fully to thee, and shall make peaceable the dwelling place of thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]];
JOB 8:7 in so much that thy former things were little, and that thy last things be multiplied greatly.
JOB 8:8 For why, ask thou the former generations, and seek thou diligently the mind of [[the]] fathers.
JOB 8:9 For we be men of yesterday, and know not; for our days be as a shadow on the earth.
JOB 8:10 And they shall teach thee, [[and]] they shall speak to thee, and of their heart they shall bring forth true speeches.
JOB 8:11 Whether a bulrush may grow with-out moisture? either a reed without water?
JOB 8:12 When it is yet in the flower, neither it is taken with hand, it waxeth dry before all herbs.
JOB 8:13 So be the ways of all men, that forget God; and the hope of an hypocrite shall perish.
JOB 8:14 His cowardice shall not please God, and his trust shall be as a web of spiders.
JOB 8:15 He shall lean, either rest, upon his house, and it shall not stand; he shall underset it, and it shall not rise up altogether.
JOB 8:16 The bulrush seemeth moist, before that the sun come; and in the rising of the sun, the seed thereof shall go out.
JOB 8:17 The roots thereof shall be made thick upon an heap of stones, and it shall dwell among [[the]] stones.
JOB 8:18 If a man draweth it out of the place thereof, that place shall deny it, and it shall say, I know thee not.
JOB 8:19 For this is the gladness of his way, that again other bulrushes spring out of the earth.
JOB 8:20 Forsooth God shall not cast away a simple man, neither he shall dress his hand to help wicked men;
JOB 8:21 till thy mouth be filled with laughter, and thy lips with hearty song.
JOB 8:22 They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the taber-nacle of wicked men shall not stand.
JOB 9:1 And Job answered, and said,
JOB 9:2 Verily I know, that it is so, and that a man comparisoned to God shall not be made just [[or justified]].
JOB 9:3 If he will strive with God, he may not answer to God one for a thousand.
JOB 9:4 He is wise in heart, and strong in might; who hath against-stood him, and had peace?
JOB 9:5 He bare over hills from one place to another, and they knew not; which he destroyed in his strong vengeance.
JOB 9:6 Which stirreth the earth from his place, and the pillars thereof shall shake altogether.
JOB 9:7 He commandeth to the sun, and it riseth not; and he closeth up the stars, as under a signet.
JOB 9:8 He alone stretcheth forth heavens, and he goeth upon the waves of the sea.
JOB 9:9 He maketh Arcturus, and Orion, and Pleiades, that is, the seven stars, and the inner things of the south.
JOB 9:10 He maketh great things, and that may not be sought out, and also wonderful things, of which there is none number.
JOB 9:11 If he cometh to me, I shall not see him; if he goeth away from me, I shall not understand.
JOB 9:12 If he asketh suddenly, who shall answer to him? either who may say to him, Why doest thou so?
JOB 9:13 He is God, whose wrath no man may withstand; and under whom they be bowed, that bear the world.
JOB 9:14 How great am I, that I answer to him, and speak by my words with him?
JOB 9:15 Which also shall not answer to him, though I have anything just [[or right]]; but I shall beseech my judge to spare me.
JOB 9:16 And when he hath heard me inwardly calling him, I believe not, that he hath heard my voice.
JOB 9:17 For in a whirlwind he shall all-break me, and he shall multiply my wounds, yea, without cause.
JOB 9:18 He granteth not, that my spirit have rest, and he filleth me with bitternesses.
JOB 9:19 If strength is sought, he is most strong; and if equity of doom is sought, no man dare yield witnessing for me.
JOB 9:20 If I will make me just [[or justify me]], my own mouth shall condemn me; if I shall show me innocent, he shall prove me a shrew.
JOB 9:21 Yea, though I be simple, my soul shall not know this same thing; and it shall annoy me of my life.
JOB 9:22 One thing is, which I spake, he shall waste by death also the innocent and [[the]] wicked man.
JOB 9:23 If he beateth, slay he once, and laugh he not of the pains of innocent men.
JOB 9:24 The earth is given into the hands of the wicked; he covereth the faces of judges; that if he is not, who there-fore is?
JOB 9:25 My days were swifter than a courier; they fled away, and saw not good.
JOB 9:26 They passed away as [[the]] ships bearing apples, as an eagle flying to meat.
JOB 9:27 When I say, I shall not speak so; I change my face, and I am tormented with sorrow.
JOB 9:28 I dread all my works, witting that thou sparest not the trespasser.
JOB 9:29 And if I am also thus wicked, why have I travailed in vain?
JOB 9:30 Though I am washed as with waters of snow, and though mine hands shine as most clean,
JOB 9:31 nevertheless thou shalt dip me in filths, and my clothes shall hold, or show, me abominable.
JOB 9:32 Truly I shall not answer a man, that is like me; neither that may be heard evenly with me in doom.
JOB 9:33 There is none, that may reprove ever either, and set [[or put]] his hand in both.
JOB 9:34 Do he away his rod from me, and his dread make not me afeared.
JOB 9:35 I shall speak, and I shall not dread him; for I may not answer dreading.
JOB 10:1 It annoyeth my soul of my life; I shall leave my speech against me, I shall speak in the bitterness of my soul.
JOB 10:2 I shall say to God, Do not thou condemn me; show thou to me, why thou deemest me so.
JOB 10:3 Whether it seemeth good to thee, if thou challengest me as false, and oppressest me, the work of thine hands; and if thou helpest the counsel of wicked men?
JOB 10:4 Whether fleshly eyes be to thee, either, as a man seeth, also thou shalt see?
JOB 10:5 Whether thy days be as the days of a man, and be thy years as man’s times;
JOB 10:6 that thou inquire about my wicked-ness, and ensearch my sin?
JOB 10:7 And thou, Lord, know, that I have done no wicked thing; since there is no man, that may deliver from thine hand?
JOB 10:8 Thine hands have made me, and have formed me all in compass; and thou hast cast me down suddenly.
JOB 10:9 Lord, I pray thee, have thou mind, that thou madest me as clay, and shalt bring me again into dust.
JOB 10:10 Whether thou hast not milked me as milk, and hast crudded or curdled me together as cheese?
JOB 10:11 Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh; and thou hast joined me together with bones and sinews.
JOB 10:12 Thou hast given life and mercy to me, and thy visiting hath kept my spirit.
JOB 10:13 And though thou coverest these things in thine heart, nevertheless I know, that thou hast mind of all these things.
JOB 10:14 And if when I did sin, thou spared-est me at an hour; why sufferest thou not me to be clean of my wickedness?
JOB 10:15 And if I was wicked, woe is to me; and if I was just [[or rightwise]], I shall not raise up mine head, that am full-filled with torment, and wretched-ness.
JOB 10:16 And if I raise up mine head for pride, thou shalt take me as a lioness; and thou turnest again, and tormentest me wonderfully.
JOB 10:17 Thou gatherest in store thy witnesses against me, and thou multipliest thine ire [[or thy wrath]], that is, vengeance, against me; and pains hold knighthood [[or fight]] in me.
JOB 10:18 Lord, why hast thou led me out of the womb? Why not had I erst been wasted, that an eye had not seen me.
JOB 10:19 That I had been, as if I were not, and were translated, either borne over, from the womb to the sepulchre.
JOB 10:20 Whether not the fewness of my days shall be ended in short time? Therefore suffer thou me, that I bewail a little my sorrow,
JOB 10:21 before that I go, and turn not again, to the dark land, and covered with the darkness of death,
JOB 10:22 to the land of wretchedness, and of darknesses; where is shadow of death, and none order, but everlasting hideousness dwelleth.
JOB 11:1 Then Zophar the Naamathite answered, and said,
JOB 11:2 Whether he, that speaketh many things, shall not also hear? either a man full of words shall be made just [[or justified]]?
JOB 11:3 Shall men be still to thee alone? and when thou hast scorned other men, shalt thou not be overcome of any man?
JOB 11:4 For thou saidest, My word is clean, and I am clean in thy sight.
JOB 11:5 And I would, that God spake with thee, and opened his lips to thee;
JOB 11:6 to show to thee the privates of wisdom, and that his law is manyfold, and thou shouldest then understand, that thou art required of God to pay much less things, than thy wickedness deserveth.
JOB 11:7 In hap thou shalt comprehend the steps of God, and thou shalt find Almighty God unto perfection.
JOB 11:8 He is higher than heaven, and what shalt thou do? he is deeper than hell, and whereof shalt thou know?
JOB 11:9 His measure is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.
JOB 11:10 If he destroyeth all things, either driveth them straitly into one, who shall against-say him? Either who may say to him, Why doest thou so?
JOB 11:11 For he knoweth the vanity of men; and whether he seeing, beholdeth not wickedness?
JOB 11:12 A vain man is raised into pride; and he guesseth himself born free, as the colt of a wild ass.
JOB 11:13 But thou hast made steadfast thine heart, and hast spread abroad thine hands to him.
JOB 11:14 If thou doest away from thee the wickedness, that is in thine hand, and if unrightwiseness dwelleth not in thy tabernacle,
JOB 11:15 then thou shalt raise up thy face without wem, and thou shalt be steadfast, and thou shalt not dread.
JOB 11:16 And thou shalt forget thy wretched-ness, and thou shalt not think of it, as of waters that have passed by.
JOB 11:17 And as midday shining, it shall raise to thee at eventide; and when thou guessest thee to be wasted, thou shalt rise up as the day star.
JOB 11:18 And thou shalt have trust, while hope shall be set forth to thee; and thou buried shalt sleep securely.
JOB 11:19 Thou shalt rest, and none shall be that shall make thee afeared; and full many men shall beseech thy face.
JOB 11:20 But the eyes of wicked men shall fail; and succor shall perish from them, and the hope of them shall be abomination of soul.
JOB 12:1 Soothly Job answered, and said,
JOB 12:2 And ye therefore be men alone, and wisdom dwell with you?
JOB 12:3 And to me is an heart, as and to you, and I am not lower than ye; for who knoweth not these things, which ye know?
JOB 12:4 He that is scorned of his friend, as I am, shall inwardly call God, and God shall hear him; for the simpleness of a just [[or rightwise]] man is scorned.
JOB 12:5 And a lamp is despised at the thoughts of rich men, the which lamp is made ready to a time ordained.
JOB 12:6 The tabernacles of robbers be plenteous [[or abound]], either full of goods; and boldly they stir God to wrath, when he hath given all things into their hands.
JOB 12:7 No wonder, ask thou [[the]] beasts, and they shall teach thee; and ask thou[[the]] birds of the air, and they shall show to thee.
JOB 12:8 Speak to the earth, and it shall answer thee; and the fishes of the sea shall tell those things.
JOB 12:9 Who knoweth not that the hand of the Lord made all these things?
JOB 12:10 In whose hand the soul is of each living thing, and the spirit of each flesh of man.
JOB 12:11 Whether the ear deemeth not words, and the cheeks of the eater deem savour, or the taste of meat?
JOB 12:12 Wisdom is in eld [[or old]] men, and prudence is in much time.
JOB 12:13 Wisdom and strength is with God; he hath counsel and understanding.
JOB 12:14 If he destroyeth, there is no man that buildeth; if he shutteth in a man, there is none that openeth.
JOB 12:15 If he holdeth altogether waters, all things shall be made dry; and if he sendeth out those waters, they shall destroy the earth.
JOB 12:16 Strength and wisdom is with God; he knoweth both him that deceiveth and him that is deceived.
JOB 12:17 And he bringeth counsellors into a fond [[or foolish]] end, and judges into wondering, either astonishing.
JOB 12:18 He unbindeth the girdle of kings, and girdeth their reins with a cord.
JOB 12:19 He leadeth their priests without glory, and he deceiveth the principal men;
JOB 12:20 and he changeth the lips of sooth-fast men, and taketh away the doctrine of eld [[or old]] men.
JOB 12:21 He sheddeth [[or poureth]] out despising on princes, and relieveth them, that were oppressed.
JOB 12:22 He showeth deep things from darknesses; and he bringeth forth into light the shadow of death.
JOB 12:23 He multiplieth folks, and he loseth them; and he restoreth them, when they be destroyed, into whole number.
JOB 12:24 He changeth the heart of [[the]] princes of the people of [[the]] earth; and deceiveth them, that they go in vain out of the way.
JOB 12:25 They shall grope, as in darknesses, and not in light; and he shall make them to err as drunken men.
JOB 13:1 Lo! mine eye, saith Job, hath seen all things, and mine ear hath heard; and I understood all things.
JOB 13:2 Even with your knowing, also I know, and I am not lower than ye.
JOB 13:3 But nevertheless I shall speak to Almighty God, and I covet to dispute with God;
JOB 13:4 and first I show you makers of lies, and lovers or favourers of wayward teachings.
JOB 13:5 And I would, that ye were still, that ye were guessed to be wise men.
JOB 13:6 Therefore hear ye my chastisings; and perceive ye the doom of my lips.
JOB 13:7 Whether God hath need to your leasing, that ye speak guileful things [[or treacheries]] for him?
JOB 13:8 Whether ye take his face, and enforce or endeavour to deem for God?
JOB 13:9 Either it shall please him, from whom nothing may be hid? Whether he, as a man, shall be deceived by your falsenesses?
JOB 13:10 He shall reprove you; for ye take his face in huddles.
JOB 13:11 Anon as he shall stir or move him, he shall trouble you; and his dread shall fall upon you.
JOB 13:12 Your mind shall be comparisoned to ashes; and your nolls shall be driven down into clay.
JOB 13:13 Be ye still a little, that I speak, whatever thing my mind hath showed to me.
JOB 13:14 Why rend I my flesh with my teeth, and bear my life in mine hands?
JOB 13:15 Yea, though God slay me, I shall hope in him; nevertheless I shall prove my ways in his sight.
JOB 13:16 And he shall be my saviour; for why each hypocrite shall not come in his sight.
JOB 13:17 Hear ye my word, and perceive ye with [[your]] ears my dark and hard privy or hard figurative speeches.
JOB 13:18 If I shall be deemed, I know that I shall be found just [[or rightwise]].
JOB 13:19 Who is he that is deemed with me? Come he; why am I still, and am wasted?
JOB 13:20 Do thou not to me two things only; and then I shall not be hid from thy face.
JOB 13:21 Make thine hand far from me; and thy dread make not me afeared.
JOB 13:22 Call thou me, and I shall answer thee; either certainly I shall speak, and thou shalt answer me.
JOB 13:23 How great sins and wickednesses have I? Show thou to me my felonies, and my trespasses.
JOB 13:24 Why hidest thou thy face, and deemest me thine enemy?
JOB 13:25 Thou showest thy might against a leaf, that is ravished away with the wind; and thou pursuest dry stubble.
JOB 13:26 For thou writest bitternesses against me; and wilt waste me with the sins of my young waxing age.
JOB 13:27 Thou hast set [[or put]] my foot in a stock, and thou hast kept all my paths; and thou hast beheld the steps of my feet.
JOB 13:28 And I shall be wasted as rot, and as a cloth, that is eaten of a moth.
JOB 14:1 A man is born of a woman, and liveth short time, and he is full-filled with many wretchednesses.
JOB 14:2 And he goeth out, and is defouled as a flower; and he fleeth away as a shadow, and dwelleth never perfectly in that same state.
JOB 14:3 And guessest thou worthy thing to open thine eyes upon such a man; and to bring him into doom with thee?
JOB 14:4 Who may make a man clean conceived of unclean seed? Whether not thou, Lord, that art alone?
JOB 14:5 The days of a man be short, and the number of his months be with thee; thou hast set, either ordained, his terms, which may not be passed.
JOB 14:6 Therefore go thou away from him a little, that he have rest; till his meed coveted come, and his day is as the day of an hired man.
JOB 14:7 A tree hath hope, if it is cut down; and again it waxeth green, and his branches spread forth.
JOB 14:8 If the root thereof is eld [[or old]] in the earth, and the stock thereof is nigh dead in dust;
JOB 14:9 it shall burgeon at the odour of water, and it shall make hair, that is, leaves and branches, or take root, as when it was planted first.
JOB 14:10 But when a man is dead, and made naked, and wasted; I pray, where is he?
JOB 14:11 As if waters go away from the sea, and as a river made void of waters wax dry,
JOB 14:12 so a man, when he hath slept, that is, died, he shall not rise again, till heaven be broken, or made new; he shall not wake, neither he shall rise altogether from his sleep.
JOB 14:13 Who giveth this to me, that thou defend me in hell, and that thou hide me, till thy great vengeance pass by; and that thou set to me a time, in which thou have mind on me?
JOB 14:14 Guessest thou, whether a dead man shall live again? Now in all the days, in which I hold knighthood, I abide, till my exchanging come.
JOB 14:15 Thou shalt call me, and I shall answer thee; thou shalt dress the right half, that is, bless, to the work of thine hands.
JOB 14:16 Soothly thou hast numbered my steps; but spare thou my sins.
JOB 14:17 Thou hast sealed as in a bag my trespasses, but thou hast cured my wickedness.
JOB 14:18 An hill falling droppeth down, and a rock of stone is borne over from his place.
JOB 14:19 Waters make stones hollow, and the earth is wasted little and little by washing away of water; and thou shalt lose men in like manner.
JOB 14:20 Thou madest a man strong a little, that he should pass by without end; thou shalt change his face, and shalt send him out.
JOB 14:21 Whether his sons be noble, either unnoble, he shall not understand.
JOB 14:22 Nevertheless his flesh, while he liveth, shall have sorrow, and his soul shall mourn upon himself.
JOB 15:1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answer-ed, and said,
JOB 15:2 Whether a wise man shall answer, as speaking against the wind, and shall fill his stomach with burning, that is ire?
JOB 15:3 For thou reprovest him by words, which is not like thee, and thou speakest that, that speedeth not to thee.
JOB 15:4 As much as is in thee, thou hast avoided dread; and thou hast taken away thy prayers before God.
JOB 15:5 For [[thy]] wickedness hath taught thy mouth, and thou pursuest [[or followest]] the tongue of blasphemers.
JOB 15:6 Thy tongue [[or Thy mouth]], and not I, shall condemn thee, and thy lips shall answer thee.
JOB 15:7 Whether thou art born the first man, and whether thou art formed before little hills?
JOB 15:8 Whether thou hast heard the counsel of God, and whether his wisdom is lower than thou?
JOB 15:9 What thing knowest thou, which we know not? What thing under-standest thou, which we know not?
JOB 15:10 Both wise men and eld, much elder than thy fathers, be among us.
JOB 15:11 Whether it is great, that God comfort thee? But thy shrewd words forbid this.
JOB 15:12 What raiseth thine heart thee, and thou as thinking great things hast eyes astonied?
JOB 15:13 What swelleth thy spirit against God, that thou bring forth of thy mouth such words?
JOB 15:14 What is a man, that he be without wem, and that he, born of a woman, appear just [[or rightwise]]?
JOB 15:15 Lo! none among his saints is unchangeable, and heavens be not clean in his sight.
JOB 15:16 How much more is a man abominable and unprofitable, that drinketh wickedness as water?
JOB 15:17 I shall show to thee, hear thou me; I shall tell to thee that, that I saw.
JOB 15:18 Wise men acknowledge, and hide not their fathers.
JOB 15:19 To which wise men alone the earth is given, and an alien shall not pass by them.
JOB 15:20 A wicked man is proud in all his days; and the number of his years and of his tyranny is uncertain.
JOB 15:21 The sound of dread is ever[[more]] in his ears, and when peace is, he supposeth ever[[more]] treasons.
JOB 15:22 He believeth not that he may turn again from darknesses to light; and he beholdeth about on each side for a sword.
JOB 15:23 When he stirreth him[[self]] to seek bread, he knoweth, that the day of darknesses is made ready in his hand.
JOB 15:24 Tribulation shall make him afeared, and anguish shall encompass him, as a king which is made ready to battle.
JOB 15:25 For he held forth his hand against God, and he was made strong against Almighty God.
JOB 15:26 He ran with his neck raised up against God, and he was armed with a fat noll.
JOB 15:27 Fatness, that is, pride of temporal abundance, covered his face, or understanding, and outward fatness, that is, unshamefastness, hangeth down of his sides. [[Fatness covered his face, and of his sides grease hangeth.]]
JOB 15:28 He shall dwell in desolate cities, and in deserted houses, that be turned into burials.
JOB 15:29 He shall not be made rich, neither his chattel shall dwell steadfastly; neither he shall send his root into the earth,
JOB 15:30 neither he shall go away from darknesses. Flame shall make dry his branches, and he shall be taken away by the spirit of his mouth.
JOB 15:31 Believe he not vainly which is deceived by error, that he shall be again-bought by any price.
JOB 15:32 Before that his days be [[ful]] filled, he shall perish, and his hands shall wax dry;
JOB 15:33 he shall be hurt as a vine in the first flower of his grape, and as an olive tree casting away his flower.
JOB 15:34 For the gathering together of an hypocrite is barren, and fire shall devour the tabernacles of them, that take gifts willfully.
JOB 15:35 He conceived sorrow, and childed wickedness, and his womb maketh ready treacheries.
JOB 16:1 Forsooth Job answered, and said,
JOB 16:2 I have oft heard such things; all ye be heavy comforters.
JOB 16:3 Whether words full of wind shall have an end? either anything is dis-easeful to thee, if thou speakest?
JOB 16:4 Also I might speak things like to you, and I would, that your soul were for my soul; and I would comfort you by words, and I would move mine head on you;
JOB 16:5 I would make you strong by my mouth, and I would move my lips as sparing you.
JOB 16:6 But what shall I do? If I speak, my sorrow resteth not; and if I am still, it goeth not away from me.
JOB 16:7 But now my sorrow hath oppressed me, and all my limbs be driven into nought.
JOB 16:8 My rivellings say witnessing against me, and a false speaker is raised up against my face, and against-saith me.
JOB 16:9 He gathered together his strong vengeance in me, and he menaced [[or threatened]] me, and he gnashed against me with his teeth; mine enemy hath beheld me with fearedful eyes.
JOB 16:10 They opened their mouths upon me, and they said shame to me, and they smote my cheek; and they be filled with my pains.
JOB 16:11 God hath enclosed me altogether at [[or with]] the wicked, and hath given me into the hands of wicked men.
JOB 16:12 I, that rich man and famous sometime, am all-broken suddenly; he held my noll; he hath broken me, and hath set [[or put]] me as into a sign.
JOB 16:13 And he hath encompassed me with his spears, he hath wounded altogether my loins; he hath not spared me, and he hath shed out mine entrails into the earth.
JOB 16:14 He hath beaten me with wound upon wound; and he as a giant hath fallen in upon me.
JOB 16:15 I sewed together a sackcloth upon my skin; and I covered my flesh with ashes.
JOB 16:16 My face swelled of weeping, and mine eyelids waxed dark.
JOB 16:17 I suffered these things without wickedness of mine hand, or work, when I had clean prayers to God.
JOB 16:18 Earth, cover thou not my blood, and my cry find not in thee a place of hiding.
JOB 16:19 For, lo! my witness is in heaven; and the Knower of my conscience is in high places.
JOB 16:20 O! my friends, full of words; mine eye droppeth out tears to God.
JOB 16:21 And I would, that a man were deemed so with God, as the son of man is deemed with his fellow.
JOB 16:22 For lo! short years pass, and I go a path, by which I shall not turn again.
JOB 17:1 My spirit shall be made feeble; my days shall be made short, and only the sepulchre is left to me.
JOB 17:2 I have not sinned, and mine eye dwelleth in bitternesses.
JOB 17:3 Lord, deliver thou me, and set [[or put]] me beside thee; and the hand of each man fight against me.
JOB 17:4 Thou hast made the heart of them far from doctrine, that is, from know-ing of truth; therefore they shall not be enhanced.
JOB 17:5 He promiseth prey to his fellows, and the eyes of his sons shall fail.
JOB 17:6 He hath set [[or put me]] as into a proverb of the common people, and his ensample before them.
JOB 17:7 Mine eye dimmed at [[the]] indig-nation; and my members be driven as into nought.
JOB 17:8 Just [[or rightwise]] men shall wonder on this thing; and an innocent shall be raised up against an hypocrite.
JOB 17:9 And a just [[or rightwise]] man shall hold his way, and he shall add strength to clean hands.
JOB 17:10 Therefore all ye be turned again, and come ye; and I shall not find in you any wise man.
JOB 17:11 My days be passed; my thoughts be scattered, tormenting mine heart.
JOB 17:12 Those [[or they]] have turned the night into day; and again after dark-nesses hope for light.
JOB 17:13 If I sustain, either suffer patiently, hell is mine house; and I have arrayed my bed in darknesses.
JOB 17:14 I said to rot, Thou art my father; and to worms, Ye be my mother, and my sister.
JOB 17:15 Therefore where is now mine abiding? and who beholdeth my patience?
JOB 17:16 All my things shall go down into [[the]] deepest hell; guessest thou, whether rest shall be to me, namely there.
JOB 18:1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, and said,
JOB 18:2 Unto what end shalt thou boast with words? Understand thou us first, and so speak we together.
JOB 18:3 Why be we areckoned as beasts, and why have we been foul before thee?
JOB 18:4 What or why losest thou thy soul in thy strong vengeance? Whether the earth shall be forsaken for thee, and hard stones shall be borne over from their place?
JOB 18:5 Whether the light of a wicked man shall not be quenched; and the flame of his fire shall not shine?
JOB 18:6 Light shall wax dark in his tabernacle; and the lantern, which is on him, shall be quenched.
JOB 18:7 The steps of his strength shall be made strait; and his counsel shall cast him down.
JOB 18:8 For he hath sent, or put, his feet into a net; and he goeth in the meshes, or knittings, thereof.
JOB 18:9 His foot shall be holden with a snare; and thirst shall burn out against him.
JOB 18:10 The foot-trap of him is hid in the earth, and his snare is laid on the path.
JOB 18:11 Dreads shall make him afeared on every side, and shall bewrap his feet.
JOB 18:12 His strength [[shall]] be made feeble by hunger; and poverty assail his ribs.
JOB 18:13 Devour it the fairness of his skin; the first engendered of death waste his arms.
JOB 18:14 His trust be taken away from his tabernacle; and perishing, as a king, above-tread on him.
JOB 18:15 The fellows of him that is not, that is, the fellows of a dead man, dwell in his tabernacle; and brimstone be sprinkled in his tabernacle.
JOB 18:16 The roots of him be made dry beneath; and be his ripe corn all-broken above.
JOB 18:17 His mind perish from the earth; and his name be not made solemn in streets.
JOB 18:18 He shall put him out from light into darknesses; and he shall bear him over from the world.
JOB 18:19 Neither his seed, neither his kin-dred, shall be in his people, neither any remnants of them left in his countries.
JOB 18:20 The last men shall wonder in his days; and hideousness shall assail the first men.
JOB 18:21 Therefore these be the tabernacles of a wicked man; and this is the place of him, that knoweth not God.
JOB 19:1 Forsooth Job answered, and said,
JOB 19:2 How long torment ye my soul, and all-break me with words?
JOB 19:3 Lo! ten times ye have shamed me, and ye be not ashamed, oppressing me.
JOB 19:4 Forsooth and if I know not [[or if I am uncunning]], mine unknowing shall be with me.
JOB 19:5 And ye be raised against me, and reprove me with my shames.
JOB 19:6 Namely now understand ye, that God hath tormented me not by even doom, and hath encompassed me with his beatings.
JOB 19:7 Lo! I suffering violence shall cry, and no man shall hear me; I shall cry loud, and there is none that deemeth me worthy to be heard.
JOB 19:8 The Lord hath beset about my path, and I may not go; and he hath set darknesses in my way.
JOB 19:9 He hath spoiled me of my glory, and hath taken away the crown from mine head.
JOB 19:10 He hath destroyed me on each side, and I perished; and he hath taken away mine hope, as from a tree pulled up by the root.
JOB 19:11 His strong vengeance was wroth against me; and he had me so as his enemy.
JOB 19:12 His thieves came together, and made to them a way by me; and besieged my tabernacle in compass.
JOB 19:13 He made [[a]] far my brethren from me; and my known as aliens went away from me.
JOB 19:14 My neighbours have forsaken me; and they that knew me have forgotten me.
JOB 19:15 The tenants of mine house, and mine handmaids, had me as a stranger; and I was as a pilgrim before their eyes.
JOB 19:16 I called my servant, and he answered not to me; with mine own mouth I prayed him.
JOB 19:17 My wife loathed my breath; and I prayed the sons of my womb.
JOB 19:18 Also fools despised me; and when I was gone away from them, they backbited me.
JOB 19:19 They, that were my counsellors sometime, had abomination of me; and he, whom I loved most, was adversary to me.
JOB 19:20 When my fleshes were wasted, my bones cleaved to my skin; and only [[the]] lips be left about my teeth.
JOB 19:21 Have ye mercy on me, have ye mercy on me, namely, ye my friends; for the hand of the Lord hath touched me.
JOB 19:22 Why pursue ye me, as God pursueth; and ye be fulfilled with my fleshes?
JOB 19:23 Who giveth, or granteth, to me, that my words be written? Who giveth to me, that those [[or they]] be written in a book,
JOB 19:24 with an iron pointel, either with a piece of lead; either with a chisel those [[or they]] be engraved in a flint?
JOB 19:25 For I know, that mine again-buyer liveth, and in the last day I shall rise from the earth;
JOB 19:26 and again I shall be encompassed with my skin, and in my flesh I shall see God, my saviour.
JOB 19:27 Whom I myself shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another man. This mine hope is kept in my bosom, that is, in mine heart.
JOB 19:28 Why therefore say ye now, Pursue we him, and find we the root of a word against him?
JOB 19:29 Therefore flee ye from the face of the sword; for the sword is the avenger of wickednesses, and know ye, that doom shall be.
JOB 20:1 And then Zophar the Naamathite answered, and said,
JOB 20:2 Therefore my thoughts diverse come one after another; and the mind is ravished into diverse things.
JOB 20:3 I shall hear the teaching, by which thou reprovest me; and the spirit of mine understanding shall answer me.
JOB 20:4 I know this from the beginning, since man was set on [[the]] earth,
JOB 20:5 that the praising of wicked men is short, and the joy of an hypocrite is at the likeness of a point soon passing.
JOB 20:6 Though his pride go up into heaven, and his head toucheth the clouds,
JOB 20:7 he shall be lost in the end, as a dunghill; and, they that have seen him, shall say, Where is he?
JOB 20:8 As a dream flying away, or soon forgotten, he shall not be found; he shall pass as the sight of nights.
JOB 20:9 The eye that saw him shall not see him again; and his place shall no more behold him.
JOB 20:10 His sons shall be all-broken with neediness; and his hands shall yield to him his sorrow.
JOB 20:11 His bones shall be [[full-]]filled with the vices of his young waxing age; and they shall sleep with him in dust.
JOB 20:12 For when evil was sweet in his mouth, he hid it under his tongue.
JOB 20:13 He shall spare it, and shall not forsake it; and he shall hide it in his throat.
JOB 20:14 His bread in his womb shall be turned into the gall of snakes within him.
JOB 20:15 He shall vomit, or cast, out the riches which he hath devoured; and God shall draw those riches out of his womb.
JOB 20:16 He shall suck the gall of snakes; and the tongue of an adder shall slay him.
JOB 20:17 See he not the streams of the flood, of the strand [[or stream]] of honey, and of butter.
JOB 20:18 He shall suffer pains for all things which he hath done, nevertheless he shall not be wasted by those pains, but ever endure; and after the multitude of his findings, so shall he suffer.
JOB 20:19 For he brake, and made naked the house of the poor man; he ravished it, and builded it not.
JOB 20:20 And his womb was not yet[[ful]]-filled; and when he hath that, that he coveted, he may not hold it in possession.
JOB 20:21 There be left nothing of his meat; and therefore nothing shall dwell of his goods.
JOB 20:22 When he is full-filled with riches, yet he shall be made strait in covet-ousness; he shall burn in it, and all sorrow shall fall in upon him.
JOB 20:23 I would, that his womb be filled, that he send out into him the wrath of his strong vengeance, and rain his battle upon him.
JOB 20:24 He shall flee iron armours [[or arms]], and he shall fall into a brazen bow.
JOB 20:25 Which is led, or taken out of his sheath, or case, and this bow going out, and shining as lightning, shall smite him in bitterness; horrible fears shall go, and come upon him.
JOB 20:26 All darknesses be hid in his privates [[or private things]]; fire, which is not tended, shall devour him; he shall be tormented and left in his tabernacle.
JOB 20:27 Heavens shall show his wicked-ness; and earth shall rise up alto-gether against him.
JOB 20:28 The seed, or generation, of his house shall be open; it shall be drawn down in the day of the strong venge-ance of the Lord.
JOB 20:29 This is the part of a wicked man, which is given to him of God, and the heritage of his words is also of the Lord.
JOB 21:1 Forsooth Job answered, and said,
JOB 21:2 I pray you, hear ye my words, and do ye penance.
JOB 21:3 Suffer ye me, that I speak; and laugh ye after my words, if it shall seem to you worthy to do so.
JOB 21:4 Whether my disputing is against man, that skillfully I owe not to be [[made]] sorry?
JOB 21:5 Perceive ye me, and be ye astonied; and set ye [[or putteth]] your finger upon your mouth.
JOB 21:6 And when I bethink me, I dread, and trembling shaketh my flesh.
JOB 21:7 Why therefore live wicked men? They be enhanced, and comforteth with riches.
JOB 21:8 Their seed dwelleth before them; the company of their kinsmen, and of the sons of their sons, dwelleth in their sight.
JOB 21:9 Their houses be secure, and peace-able; and the rod, or scourge, of God is not upon them.
JOB 21:10 The cow of them conceived, and calved not a dead calf; the cow calved, and is not deprived of her calf.
JOB 21:11 Their little children go out as flocks; and their young children full out joy with playings.
JOB 21:12 They hold the tympan, and harp; and they joy at the sound of the organ.
JOB 21:13 They lead in goods their days; and in a point, they go down to hells, that is, to burials, or the grave.
JOB 21:14 Which men said to God, Go thou away from us; we desire not the knowing of thy ways.
JOB 21:15 Who is Almighty God, that we serve him? and what profiteth it to us, if we pray him?
JOB 21:16 Nevertheless for their goods be not in their hand, or power, the counsel of wicked men be far from me.
JOB 21:17 How oft shall the lantern of wicked men be quenched, and flowing shall come upon them, and God shall part with them the sorrows of his strong vengeance?
JOB 21:18 They shall be as chaff before the face of the wind; and as a dead spark, that the whirlwind scattereth abroad.
JOB 21:19 Ye say, God shall keep the sorrow of the father to his sons; and when he hath yielded to them vengeance, then he shall know it.
JOB 21:20 His eyes shall see their slaying; and he shall drink of the strong vengeance of Almighty God.
JOB 21:21 For why what pertaineth it to him of his house after him, though the number of his months be half taken away?
JOB 21:22 Whether any man shall teach God knowing, which deemeth them that be on high?
JOB 21:23 This evil man dieth strong and whole, rich and blessful to the world.
JOB 21:24 His entrails be full of fatness; and his bones be moisted with marrow.
JOB 21:25 And another man dieth in the bitterness of his soul, and without any riches.
JOB 21:26 Nevertheless they shall sleep together in dust, and worms shall cover them.
JOB 21:27 Certainly I know your wicked thoughts, and your sentences against me.
JOB 21:28 For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? and where be the taber-nacles of wicked men?
JOB 21:29 Ask ye this of each way-goer; and ye shall know, that he knoweth these same things,
JOB 21:30 that is, that an evil man shall be kept into the day of perdition, and he shall be led to the day of strong vengeance.
JOB 21:31 Who shall reprove his ways before him? and who shall yield to him for those things, which he hath done?
JOB 21:32 He shall be led to the sepulchres; and he shall wake in the heap of dead men.
JOB 21:33 He was sweet to the stones, either filths, of hell; and he draweth each man after him, and unnumber-able men went before him.
JOB 21:34 How therefore comfort ye me in vain, since your answers be showed to contrary the truth?
JOB 22:1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answer-ed, and said,
JOB 22:2 Whether a man, yea, when he is of perfect knowing, may be compar-isoned to God?
JOB 22:3 What profiteth it to God, if thou art just [[or rightwise]]? either what shalt thou give to him, if thy life is without wem?
JOB 22:4 Whether he shall dread, and shall he reprove thee, and shall he come with thee into doom,
JOB 22:5 and not for thy full much malice, and thy wickednesses without number, these pains have fallen justly to thee?
JOB 22:6 For thou hast taken away without cause the wed of thy brethren; and hast spoiled naked men of clothes.
JOB 22:7 Thou gavest not water to the faint man; and thou withdrewest bread from the hungry man.
JOB 22:8 In the strength of thine arm, thou haddest the land in possession; and thou, most mighty, heldest it.
JOB 22:9 Thou lettest widows go away void, or unhelped; and all-brakest the shoulders of fatherless children.
JOB 22:10 Therefore thou art now encom-passed with snares; and sudden dread troubleth thee.
JOB 22:11 And thou guessedest, that thou shouldest not see darknesses; and that thou shouldest not be oppressed with the fierceness of waters flowing.
JOB 22:12 Whether thou thinkest not, that God is higher than heaven, and is enhanced above the top of stars?
JOB 22:13 And yet thou sayest, What soothly knoweth God? and, He deemeth as by darkness.
JOB 22:14 A cloud is his hiding place, and he beholdeth not our things, and he goeth about the hinges of heaven, that is, the principal parts of heaven.
JOB 22:15 Whether thou covetest to keep to the path of world’s, that is, the life of men living worldly and dissolutely, which wicked men have oft gone?
JOB 22:16 Which were taken away before their time, and the flood destroyed the foundament of them.
JOB 22:17 Which said to God, Go thou away from us; and as if Almighty God may do nothing, they guessed him,
JOB 22:18 when he had filled their houses with goods; the sentence of which men be far from me.
JOB 22:19 Just [[or Rightwise]] men shall see, and shall be glad; and an innocent man shall scorn them.
JOB 22:20 Whether the up-raising of them is not cut down, and fire shall devour the remnants of them?
JOB 22:21 Therefore assent thou to God, and have thou peace; and by these things thou shalt have best fruits.
JOB 22:22 Take thou the law of his mouth, and set [[or put]] thou his words in thine heart.
JOB 22:23 If thou turnest again to Almighty God, thou shalt be builded [[up]]; and thou shalt make wickedness far from thy tabernacle.
JOB 22:24 He shall give a flint for earth, and golden strands [[or streams]] for a flint.
JOB 22:25 And Almighty God shall be against thine enemies; and silver shall be gathered together to thee.
JOB 22:26 Then on Almighty God thou shalt flow with delights; and thou shalt raise up thy face to God.
JOB 22:27 Thou shalt pray him, and he shall hear thee; and thou shalt yield thy vows.
JOB 22:28 Thou shalt deem a thing, and it shall come to thee; and light shall shine in thy ways.
JOB 22:29 For he that is meeked shall be in glory; and he that boweth down his eyes, shall be saved.
JOB 22:30 An innocent shall be saved; soothly he shall be saved in the cleanness of his hands.
JOB 23:1 And Job answered, and said,
JOB 23:2 Now also my word is in bitter-ness, and the hand of my wound is aggrieved on my wailing.
JOB 23:3 Who giveth to me, that I know, and find him, and come unto his throne?
JOB 23:4 I shall set doom before him, and I shall fill my mouth with arguments;
JOB 23:5 that I know the words, which he shall answer to me, and that I under-stand, what he shall speak to me.
JOB 23:6 I will or desire not, that he strive with me by great strength, neither that he oppress me with the heaviness of his greatness.
JOB 23:7 Set he forth equity against me, and my doom come perfectly to victory.
JOB 23:8 If I go to the east, God appeareth not there; if I go to the west, I shall not understand him;
JOB 23:9 if I go to the left side, what shall I do? I shall not take him; if I turn me to the right side, I shall not see him.
JOB 23:10 But he knoweth my way, and he shall prove me as gold, that passeth through the fire.
JOB 23:11 My foot pursued [[or followed]] his steps; I kept to his way, and I bowed not away from it.
JOB 23:12 I went not away from the commandments of his lips; and I hid in my bosom the words of his mouth.
JOB 23:13 For he is alone, and no man may turn away his thoughts; and whatever thing he would, his will did this thing.
JOB 23:14 When he hath [[ful]] filled his will in me, also many other like things be ready to him.
JOB 23:15 And therefore I am troubled of his face, and I beholding him am anguished for dread.
JOB 23:16 God hath made nesh mine heart, and Almighty God hath troubled me.
JOB 23:17 Certainly I perished not for dark-nesses nighing to me; neither mist covered my face.
JOB 24:1 Times be not hid from Almighty God; soothly they that know him, know not his days.
JOB 24:2 Other men have turned over the terms, or the boundary stones, of neighbours, they have taken away their flocks, and fed themselves.
JOB 24:3 They have driven away the ass of fatherless children, and they took away the cow of a widow for a wed.
JOB 24:4 They destroyed the way of poor men, and they oppressed together the mild men of [[the]] earth.
JOB 24:5 Other men as wild asses in desert go out to their work; and they wake to take prey, and before make ready bread to their children.
JOB 24:6 They cut down a field not theirs, and they gather [[the]] grapes of his vinery, whom they have oppressed by violence.
JOB 24:7 They leave men naked, and take away their clothes, to the which men there is no covering in cold;
JOB 24:8 which men the rains of mountains wet, and they have no covering, and they embrace stones.
JOB 24:9 They did violence, and robbed fatherless and motherless children; and they spoiled, either robbed, the community of poor men.
JOB 24:10 They took away ears of corn from naked men, and going without cloth, and from hungry men.
JOB 24:11 They were hid in midday among the heaps of those men, that thirst, when the presses of grapes be trodden.
JOB 24:12 They made men of cities to wail, and the souls of wounded men shall cry; and God suffereth it not to go away unpunished.
JOB 24:13 They were rebel to light; they knew not the ways thereof, neither they turned again by the paths thereof.
JOB 24:14 A manslayer riseth full early, and slayeth a needy man, and a poor man; and by night he shall be as a night thief.
JOB 24:15 The eye of [[the]] adulterer keepeth darkness, and saith, An eye shall not see me; and he shall cover his face.
JOB 24:16 They undermine houses in dark-nesses, as they said together to them-selves in the day; and they knew not light.
JOB 24:17 If the morrowtide appeareth suddenly, they deem it the shadow of death; and so they go in darknesses, as in light.
JOB 24:18 He is unstabler than the face of the water; his part in [[the]] earth be cursed, and go he not by the way of vineries [[or vines]].
JOB 24:19 Pass he to a full great heat from the waters of snows, and the sin of him till to hells [[or hell]].
JOB 24:20 Mercy forget him; his sweetness be for a worm; be he not in mind, but be he all-broken as an unfruitful tree.
JOB 24:21 For he fed on the barren, and her that childeth not, and he did not well to the widow.
JOB 24:22 He drew down strong men in his strength; and when he standeth in great state or prosperity, he shall not believe to his life.
JOB 24:23 God gave to him a place of penance, and he misuseth that into pride; soothly the eyes of God be beholding in the ways of that man.
JOB 24:24 They be raised up at a little while, and they shall not stand; and they shall be made low as all vile things, and they shall be taken away; and as the highnesses of ears of corn they shall be all-broken.
JOB 24:25 That if it is not so, who may reprove me, that I lied, and have put forth follily my words before God?
JOB 25:1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, and said,
JOB 25:2 Power and dread is with him, that is, God, which maketh according in his high things.
JOB 25:3 Whether there is a number of his knights? and upon whom shineth not his light?
JOB 25:4 Whether a man comparisoned to God may be justified, either a man born of a woman may appear clean?
JOB 25:5 Lo! also the moon shineth not, and [[the]] stars be not clean in his sight;
JOB 25:6 how much more man, that is rot, and the son of a man, that is a worm, is unclean in comparison to God.
JOB 26:1 Forsooth Job answered, and said,
JOB 26:2 Whose helper art thou? whether of the feeble, and sustainest the arm of him, which is not strong?
JOB 26:3 To whom hast thou given counsel? In hap to him that hath not wisdom; and thou hast showed full much prudence.
JOB 26:4 Either whom wouldest thou teach? whether not him, that made breathing?
JOB 26:5 Lo! giants wail under waters, and they that dwell with them.
JOB 26:6 Hell is naked before him, and no covering is to perdition.
JOB 26:7 The which God stretcheth forth the north upon void thing, and he hangeth the earth upon nought.
JOB 26:8 And he bindeth waters in their clouds, that those [[or they]] break not out altogether downward.
JOB 26:9 He holdeth the cheer of his seat, and spreadeth abroad thereon his cloud.
JOB 26:10 He hath encompassed a term, or an end, to waters, till that light and darkness be ended.
JOB 26:11 The pillars of heaven tremble, and dread at his will.
JOB 26:12 In the strength of him the seas were gathered together suddenly, and his prudence smote the proud.
JOB 26:13 His spirit hath adorned heavens, and the crooked serpent was led out by his hand, leading him out as a midwife leadeth out a child.
JOB 26:14 Lo! these things be said in part of his ways; and when we have heard scarcely a little drop of his word, who may see the thunder of his greatness?
JOB 27:1 Also Job added, taking his parable, and said,
JOB 27:2 God liveth, that hath taken away my doom, and Almighty God, that hath brought my soul to bitterness.
JOB 27:3 For as long as breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils,
JOB 27:4 my lips shall not speak wicked-ness, neither my tongue shall think a leasing.
JOB 27:5 Far be it from me, that I deem you just [[or rightwise]]; till I fail, that is, as long as I live, I shall not go away from mine innocence.
JOB 27:6 I shall not forsake my justifying, which I began to hold; for mine heart reproveth me not in all my life.
JOB 27:7 As my wicked enemy doeth; mine adversary is as wicked.
JOB 27:8 For what is the hope of an hypocrite, if he ravisheth greedily, and God delivereth not his soul?
JOB 27:9 Whether God shall hear the cry of him, when anguish shall come upon him?
JOB 27:10 either whether he may delight in Almighty God, and inwardly call God in all time?
JOB 27:11 I shall teach you by the hand of God, what things Almighty God hath; and I shall not hide them.
JOB 27:12 Lo! all ye know, and what then speak ye vain things without cause?
JOB 27:13 This is the part of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of violent men, or raveners, which they shall take of Almighty God.
JOB 27:14 If his children be multiplied, they shall be killed with sword; and his sons shall not be [[ful]] filled with bread.
JOB 27:15 They, that be residue of him, shall be buried in perishing; and the widows of him shall not weep.
JOB 27:16 If he gathereth together silver as earth, and maketh ready clothes as clay;
JOB 27:17 soothly he made these things ready, but a just [[or rightwise]] man shall be clothed in those things, and an innocent man shall part the silver.
JOB 27:18 As a moth he hath builded his house, and as a keeper he made a shadowing place.
JOB 27:19 A rich man, when he shall die, shall bear nothing with him; he shall open his eyes, and he shall find nothing.
JOB 27:20 Poverty as water shall take him; and tempest shall oppress him in the night.
JOB 27:21 Burning wind shall take him, and it shall do him away; and as a whirl-wind it shall ravish him from his place.
JOB 27:22 The Lord shall send out torments upon him, and shall not spare; he fleeing shall flee from his hand.
JOB 27:23 He shall constrain his hands on him, and he shall hiss on him, and shall behold his place.
JOB 28:1 Silver hath [[the]] beginning of his veins; and a place is to gold, in which it is welled together.
JOB 28:2 Iron is taken from the earth, and a stone dissolved, or melted, by heat, is turned into money.
JOB 28:3 God hath set time to darknesses, and he beholdeth the end of all things. Also a strand [[or stream]] parteth a stone of darkness, and the shadow of death,
JOB 28:4 from the people going in pilgrim-age; it parteth those hills, which the foot of a needy man forgat, and hills without a way.
JOB 28:5 The earth, whereof bread came forth in his place, is destroyed by fire.
JOB 28:6 The place of a sapphire be the stones thereof, and the clots thereof be gold.
JOB 28:7 A bird knew not the way, and the eye of a vulture beheld it not.
JOB 28:8 The sons of merchants trode not upon that way, and a lioness passed not thereby.
JOB 28:9 God stretched forth his hand to a flint; he destroyed [[the]] hills from the roots thereof.
JOB 28:10 He hewed down rivers in stones; and his eye saw all precious thing/s.
JOB 28:11 And he sought out the depths or deepness of floods; and he brought forth hid things into light.
JOB 28:12 But where is wisdom found, and which is the place of understanding?
JOB 28:13 Man knoweth not the price there-of, neither it is found in the land of men living delicately.
JOB 28:14 The depth of waters saith, It is not in me; and the sea speaketh, It is not with me.
JOB 28:15 Gold full clean shall not be given for wisdom, neither silver shall be weighed in the exchanging thereof.
JOB 28:16 It shall not be comparisoned to the dyed colours of India, nor to the most precious stone sardius, neither to the sapphire.
JOB 28:17 Neither gold, neither glass shall be made even worth thereto; and high and far appearing vessels of gold shall not be exchanged for wisdom,
JOB 28:18 neither they shall be had in mind in comparison thereof. Forsooth wisdom is drawn out of privy things;
JOB 28:19 topaz of Ethiopia shall not be made even worth to wisdom, and most precious dyeings shall not be set together in price, or comparisoned, thereto.
JOB 28:20 Therefore whereof cometh wisdom, and which is the place of understanding?
JOB 28:21 It is hid from the eyes of all living men; and also it is hid from the birds of heaven, or of the air.
JOB 28:22 Perdition and death said, With our ears we have heard the fame of wisdom.
JOB 28:23 God understandeth the way there-of, and he knoweth the place thereof.
JOB 28:24 For he beholdeth the ends of the world, and beholdeth all things that be under heaven.
JOB 28:25 He hath made weight to winds, and he hath weighed waters in measure.
JOB 28:26 When he set law to rain, and way to tempests sounding;
JOB 28:27 then he saw wisdom, and told it out, and he made it ready, and sought it out.
JOB 28:28 And he said to man, Lo! the dread of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to go away from evil, is understanding.
JOB 29:1 Also Job added, taking his parable, and said,
JOB 29:2 Who giveth to me, that I be beside the eld months, by the days in which God kept me?
JOB 29:3 When his lantern shined on mine head, and I went in darknesses at his light.
JOB 29:4 As I was in the days of my youth, when in private God was in my tabernacle.
JOB 29:5 When Almighty God was with me, and my children were in my compass;
JOB 29:6 when I washed my feet in [[or with]] butter, and the stone shedded [[or poured]] out to me the streams [[or rivers]] of oil;
JOB 29:7 when I went forth to the gate of the city, and in the street they made ready a chair to me.
JOB 29:8 Young wanton men saw me, and were hid, and eld [[or old]] men rising up stood;
JOB 29:9 princes ceased to speak, and they putted their finger on their mouth;
JOB 29:10 dukes refrained their voice, and their tongue cleaved to their throat.
JOB 29:11 The ear that heard me, blessed me, and the eye that saw me, yielded witnessing to me;
JOB 29:12 for I delivered the poor man crying [[out]], and the fatherless child, that had no helper.
JOB 29:13 The blessing of a man ready to perish came on me, and I comforted the heart of the widow.
JOB 29:14 I was clothed with rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and I clothed me as with a cloth, and with my doom a diadem.
JOB 29:15 I was eye to a blind man, and foot to a crooked man.
JOB 29:16 I was a father of poor men; and I inquired most diligently the cause, which I knew not.
JOB 29:17 I all-brake the great teeth of the wicked man, and I took away the prey from his teeth.
JOB 29:18 And I said, I shall die in my nest; and as a palm tree I shall multiply my days.
JOB 29:19 My root is opened beside waters, and dew shall dwell in my reaping.
JOB 29:20 My glory shall ever[[more]] be renewed, and my bow shall be restored in mine hand.
JOB 29:21 They, that heard me, abided my sentence; and they were attentive, or taking heed to me, and they were still at my counsel.
JOB 29:22 They durst nothing add to my words; and my speech dropped upon them.
JOB 29:23 They abided me as rain; and they opened their mouth as to the soft rain coming late.
JOB 29:24 If any time I laughed to them, they believed not; and the light of my cheer, that is, the gladness of my face, felled not down into the earth.
JOB 29:25 If I would go to them, I sat the first; and when I sat as [[a]] king, while the host stood about, nevertheless I was [[the]] comforter of them that mourned.
JOB 30:1 But now younger men in time scorn me, whose fathers I deigned not to set with the dogs of my flock.
JOB 30:2 Of which men the strength of their hands was for nought to me, and they were guessed unworthy to that life.
JOB 30:3 They were barren for neediness and hunger; they gnawed in wilder-ness, and were pale for poverty and wretchedness;
JOB 30:4 and they ate herbs, and the rinds of trees; and the root of junipers was their meat.
JOB 30:5 The which men ravished these things from great valleys; and when they had found any of all these things, they ran with a cry to them.
JOB 30:6 They dwelled in deserts of strands [[or streams]], and in caves of [[the]] earth, either on gravel.
JOB 30:7 Which were glad among such things, and they areckoned as delights to be under bushes.
JOB 30:8 These were the sons of fools, and of unnoble men, and utterly appearing not on [[the]] earth.
JOB 30:9 But now I am turned into the song of them, and I am made a proverb to them.
JOB 30:10 They hold me abominable, and they flee far from me, and dread not to spit on my face.
JOB 30:11 For God hath opened his arrow case, and he hath tormented me, and he hath put a bridle into my mouth.
JOB 30:12 At the right side of the east my wretchednesses have risen up anon; they turned upside down my feet, and they oppressed me with their paths as with floods.
JOB 30:13 They destroyed my ways; they setted treason to me, and they had the mastery; and there was none that helped me.
JOB 30:14 They felled in upon me as by a broken wall, and by gate opened, and were stretched forth to my wretched-nesses.
JOB 30:15 I am driven into nought; he took away my desire as [[the]] wind, and mine help passed away as a cloud.
JOB 30:16 But now my soul fadeth in myself, and [[the]] days of torment hold me steadfastly.
JOB 30:17 In [[the]] night my bone is pierced with sorrows; and they, that eat me, sleep not.
JOB 30:18 In the multitude of those [[or them]] my cloth is wasted, and they have girded me as with the collar of a coat.
JOB 30:19 I am comparisoned to clay, and I am made like to a dead spark and ashes.
JOB 30:20 I shall cry to thee, and thou shalt not hear me; I stand, and thou behold-est not me.
JOB 30:21 Thou art changed into cruel to me, and in the hardness of thine hand thou art adversary to me.
JOB 30:22 Thou hast raised me, and hast set me as on wind; and hast hurtled me down strongly.
JOB 30:23 I know, that thou shalt betake me to death, where an house is ordained to each living man.
JOB 30:24 Nevertheless thou sendest not out thine hand to the wasting of them; and if they fall down, thou shalt save them.
JOB 30:25 I wept sometime on him that was tormented, and my soul had compas-sion on a poor man.
JOB 30:26 I abode goods, and evils be come to me; I abode light, and darknesses brake out.
JOB 30:27 Mine inner things boiled out with-out my rest; and [[the]] days of torment came before me.
JOB 30:28 I went mourning, and I rose up without strong vengeance in the company, and I cried.
JOB 30:29 I was the brother of dragons, and the fellow of ostriches.
JOB 30:30 My skin was made black upon me, and my bones dried for heat.
JOB 30:31 Mine harp is turned into mourning, and mine organ into the voice of weepers.
JOB 31:1 I made [[a]] covenant with mine eyes, that I should not think on a virgin.
JOB 31:2 For what part should God above have in me, and what heritage should Almighty God of high things have in me?
JOB 31:3 Whether perdition is not to a wicked man, and alienation of God is to men working wickedness?
JOB 31:4 Whether he beholdeth not my ways, and numbereth all my goings?
JOB 31:5 If I have gone in vanity, and my foot hath hasted to go in guile [[or treachery]],
JOB 31:6 God weigh me in a just balance, and know he my simpleness.
JOB 31:7 If my steps have bowed from the way; and if mine eyes have pursued [[or followed]] mine heart, consenting to lust, and if a spot have cleaved to mine hands;
JOB 31:8 sow I, and another eat, and my generation be drawn out by the root.
JOB 31:9 And if mine heart was deceived on a woman, and if I have set ambush at the door of my friend;
JOB 31:10 my wife be then the whore of another man, and other men be bowed down upon her.
JOB 31:11 For this is unleaveful, and the most wickedness.
JOB 31:12 Fire is devouring till to wasting, and drawing up by the root all generations.
JOB 31:13 If I despised to take doom with my servant and with mine handmaid, when they strived against me.
JOB 31:14 What soothly shall I do, when God shall rise up to deem? and when he shall ask, what shall I answer to him?
JOB 31:15 Whether he, that wrought also him, made not me in the womb, and one God formed me in the womb?
JOB 31:16 If I denied to poor men that, that they would, and if I made the eyes of a widow to abide;
JOB 31:17 if I alone ate my morsel, and a fatherless child ate not thereof;
JOB 31:18 for merciful doing increased with me, from my young childhood, and it went out of my mother’s womb with me;
JOB 31:19 if I despised a man passing forth by me, for he had not a cloth, and a poor man without covering;
JOB 31:20 if his sides blessed not me, and were not made hot of the fleece of my sheep;
JOB 31:21 if I raised up mine hand upon a fatherless child, yea, when I saw me the higher in the gate;
JOB 31:22 my shoulder fall from his joint, and mine arm with his bones be all-broken.
JOB 31:23 For ever[[more]] I dreaded God, as waves waxing great upon me; and I might not bear his burden.
JOB 31:24 If I guessed gold my strength, and I said to pured gold, Thou art my trust;
JOB 31:25 if I was glad on my many riches, and for mine hand found full many things;
JOB 31:26 if I saw the sun, when it shined, and the moon going clearly;
JOB 31:27 and if mine heart was glad in private, and if I kissed mine hand with my mouth;
JOB 31:28 the which is the most wickedness, and denying against the highest God;
JOB 31:29 if I had joy at the falling of him, that hated me, and if I joyed fully [[or full out joyed]], that evil had found him;
JOB 31:30 for I gave not my throat to do sin, that I should assail and curse his soul;
JOB 31:31 if the men of my tabernacle said not, Who giveth, that we be [[ful]] filled of his fleshes?
JOB 31:32 a pilgrim dwelled not withoutforth; my door was open to a way-goer or a way-faring man;
JOB 31:33 if I as [[a]] man hid my sin, and covered my wickedness in my bosom;
JOB 31:34 if I dreaded at [[the]] full great multitude, and if despising of neigh-bours made me afeared; and not more, I was still, and went not out of the door;
JOB 31:35 who giveth then an helper to me, that Almighty God hear my desire? that he that deemeth, write a book,
JOB 31:36 that I bear it on my shoulder, and encompass it as a crown to me?
JOB 31:37 By all my degrees I shall pronounce it, and I shall as offering offer it to the prince.
JOB 31:38 If my land crieth against me, and his furrows weep with it;
JOB 31:39 if I ate fruits thereof without money, and I tormented the soul of earth-tillers of it;
JOB 31:40 a briar grow to me for wheat, and a thorn for barley.
JOB 32:1 Forsooth these three men left off to answer Job, for he seemed a just [[or rightwise]] man to them.
JOB 32:2 And Elihu, the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the kindred of Ram, was wroth, and had indignation; and he was wroth against Job, for he said himself to be just before God.
JOB 32:3 And also Elihu had indignation against the three friends of Job, for they had found no reasonable answer, but only had condemned Job.
JOB 32:4 Therefore Elihu abode Job speak-ing, for they, that spake, were elder men.
JOB 32:5 But when he had seen, that these three men might not answer Job, he was wroth greatly.
JOB 32:6 And Elihu, the son of Barachel the Buzite, answered, and said, I am younger in time, and ye be elder; therefore with head holden down, I dreaded to show to you my sentence.
JOB 32:7 For I hoped that [[the]] longer age should speak, and that the multitude of years should teach wisdom.
JOB 32:8 But as I see now, a spirit is in men, and the inspiration, either revelation, of Almighty God giveth understanding.
JOB 32:9 Men of long life be not always wise, and eld [[or old]] men understand not doom.
JOB 32:10 Therefore I shall say, Hear ye me, and I also shall show my knowing to you.
JOB 32:11 For I abode your words, I heard your prudence, as long as ye disputed in your words.
JOB 32:12 And as long as I guessed you to say anything, I beheld; but as I perceive, there is none of you, that may reprove Job, and answer to his words;
JOB 32:13 lest peradventure ye say, We have found wisdom; God, and not man, hath cast him away.
JOB 32:14 Job spake nothing to me, and I not by your words shall answer him.
JOB 32:15 They [[much]] dreaded, and answer-ed no more, and took away speech from themselves.
JOB 32:16 Therefore since I abode, and they spake not, they stood, and answered no more;
JOB 32:17 also I shall answer my part, and I shall show my knowing.
JOB 32:18 For I am full of words, and the spirit of my womb, that is, my mind, constraineth me.
JOB 32:19 Lo! my womb is as must without a spigot or faucet, either a venting, that bursteth new vessels.
JOB 32:20 I shall speak, and breathe again a little; I shall open my lips, and I shall answer.
JOB 32:21 I shall not take the person of a man, and I shall not make God even to man.
JOB 32:22 For I know not how long I shall abide alive, and if my Maker will take me away after a little time.
JOB 33:1 Therefore, Job, hear thou my speeches, and hearken to all my words.
JOB 33:2 Lo! I have opened my mouth, my tongue shall speak in my cheeks.
JOB 33:3 Of simple heart be my words, and my lips shall speak clean sentence.
JOB 33:4 The spirit of God made me, and the breathing of Almighty God quick-ened me.
JOB 33:5 If thou mayest, answer thou to me, and stand thou against my face.
JOB 33:6 Lo! God made me as and thee; and also I am formed of the same clay.
JOB 33:7 Nevertheless my miracle, that is, knowing given of God, either by miracle, to me, make thee not afeared, and mine eloquence be not grievous to thee.
JOB 33:8 Thou saidest in mine hearing, and I heard the voice of thy words,
JOB 33:9 I am clean, and without guilt, and unwemmed, and wickedness is not in me.
JOB 33:10 For God found quarrels in me, therefore he deemed me enemy to himself.
JOB 33:11 He hath set [[or put]] my feet in a stock; he kept all my paths.
JOB 33:12 Therefore this thing it is, in which thou art not made just; I shall answer to thee, that God is more than man.
JOB 33:13 Thou, Job, strivest against God, that not at all thy words [[he]] answered to thee.
JOB 33:14 God speaketh once, and the second time he rehearseth not the same thing.
JOB 33:15 God speaketh by a dream in the vision of night, when sleep falleth on men, and when they sleep in their bed.
JOB 33:16 Then he openeth the ears of men, and he teacheth them, and teacheth prudence or discipline;
JOB 33:17 that he turn away a man from these things which he made, and deliver him from pride;
JOB 33:18 and that he deliver his soul from corruption, and his life, that it go not into sword.
JOB 33:19 Also God blameth a man by sorrow in his bed, and he maketh all the bones of him for to wax rotten.
JOB 33:20 Bread is made abominable to him in his life, and the meat, that before was to him desirable, loathed to his soul after.
JOB 33:21 His flesh shall fail for rot, and his bones, that were covered, shall be made naked.
JOB 33:22 His soul shall nigh to corruption, and his life to things bringing death.
JOB 33:23 If an angel, one of a thousand, is speaking for him, that he show the equity of man,
JOB 33:24 God shall have mercy on him, and shall say, Deliver thou him, that he go not down into corruption; I have found in what thing I shall do mercy to him.
JOB 33:25 His flesh is wasted with torments; turn he again to the days of his young waxing age.
JOB 33:26 He shall beseech God, and he shall be quemeful to him; and he shall see his face in perfect joy, and he shall yield to man his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]].
JOB 33:27 He shall behold men, and he shall say, I have sinned, and verily I have trespassed; and I have not received, as I was worthy.
JOB 33:28 Forsooth he hath delivered his soul, that it should not go into perish-ing, but that he living should see light.
JOB 33:29 Lo! God worketh all these things in three times by all men;
JOB 33:30 that he again-call their souls from corruption, and enlighten them in the light of living men.
JOB 33:31 Job, take heed, and hear thou me, and be thou still, while I speak.
JOB 33:32 But if thou hast ready what thou shalt speak, answer thou to me, speak; for I will or desire, that thou appear just.
JOB 33:33 That if thou hast not, hear thou me; be thou still, and I shall teach thee wisdom.
JOB 34:1 And Elihu pronounced, and spake also these things,
JOB 34:2 Wise men, hear ye my words, and learned men, hearken ye to me;
JOB 34:3 for the ear proveth words, and the throat deemeth meat by taste.
JOB 34:4 Choose we doom to us; and see we among us, what is the better.
JOB 34:5 For Job said, I am just [[or rightwise]], and God hath turned my justness [[or doom]] upside-down.
JOB 34:6 For why leasing is in deeming me, and mine arrow is violent with-out any sin.
JOB 34:7 Who is a man, as Job is, that drinketh scorning as water?
JOB 34:8 that goeth with men working wick-edness, and goeth with unfaithful men?
JOB 34:9 For he said, A man shall not please God, yea, though he run with God.
JOB 34:10 Therefore ye wise men, that is, ye with understanding, hear ye me; un-piety, either cruelty, be far from God, and wickedness from Almighty God.
JOB 34:11 For he shall yield after the work of a man to him; and by the ways of each man he shall restore to him.
JOB 34:12 For verily God shall not condemn without cause; neither Almighty God shall destroy doom.
JOB 34:13 What other man hath he ordained upon earth? either whom hath he set [[or put]] upon the world, that he hath made?
JOB 34:14 If God dresseth his heart to him, he shall draw to himself his spirit and blast or breath.
JOB 34:15 Each flesh shall fail together in dying; and a man shall turn again into ashes.
JOB 34:16 Therefore if thou hast understand-ing, hear thou that that is said, and hearken to the voice of my speech.
JOB 34:17 Whether he that loveth not doom may be made whole? and how then condemnest thou so much him, that is just [[or rightwise]]?
JOB 34:18 He it is that saith to a king, Thou art apostate, either breaker of religion, when he keepeth not rightfulness and the common good; which calleth the dukes unpious, either unfaithful.
JOB 34:19 He accepteth not the persons of princes, neither he knoweth a tyrant to spare him, when he striveth against a poor man; for all men be the work of his hands.
JOB 34:20 They shall die suddenly, and at midnight peoples shall be troubled; and shall pass away, and shall take away a violent man without hand.
JOB 34:21 For the eyes of God be on the ways of men, and he beholdeth all the goings of them.
JOB 34:22 No darknesses be, neither no shadow of death is, that they, that work wickedness, be hid there;
JOB 34:23 for it is no more in the power of man, that he come to God into doom.
JOB 34:24 God shall all-break many men and unnumberable; and shall make other men to stand for them.
JOB 34:25 For he knoweth the works of them; [[and]] therefore he shall bring in night upon them, and they shall be all-broken.
JOB 34:26 He smote them, as unpious men, in the place of seeing men.
JOB 34:27 Which went away from him by casting afore or by forecasting, and would not understand all his ways.
JOB 34:28 That they should make the cry of a needy man to come to him, and that he should hear the voice of poor men.
JOB 34:29 For when he granteth peace, who is it that condemneth him? And since he hideth his cheer, who is that seeth him? And on folks, and on all men, he hath power to do such things.
JOB 34:30 Which maketh a man, hypocrite, to reign, for the sins of the people.
JOB 34:31 Therefore for I have spoken to God, I shall not forbid thee to speak.
JOB 34:32 If I have erred, teach thou me; if I have spoken wickedness, I shall no more add to.
JOB 34:33 Whether God asketh that wickedness of thee, for it displeased thee? For thou hast begun to speak, and not I; that if thou knowest anything better, speak thou that.
JOB 34:34 Men of understanding, speak to me; and a wise man, hear me.
JOB 34:35 Forsooth Job hath spoken follily, and his words sound not like teaching.
JOB 34:36 My father God, be Job proved unto the end; cease thou not from the man of wickedness,
JOB 34:37 that addeth blasphemy over his sins. Be he constrained among us in the meantime; and then by his words stir he God to the doom.
JOB 35:1 Therefore Elihu spake again, these things,
JOB 35:2 Whether thy thought seemeth even, either rightful, to thee, that thou should-est say, I am right-fuller [[or more right-wise]] than God?
JOB 35:3 For thou saidest, That, that is good, pleaseth not thee; either what profit-eth it to thee, if I do sin?
JOB 35:4 Therefore I shall answer to thy words, and to thy friends with thee.
JOB 35:5 See thou, and behold heaven, and behold thou the air, and know that God is higher than thou. [[Behold heaven, and look, and mindfully see the clouds, that is higher than thou.]]
JOB 35:6 If thou sinnest, what shalt thou annoy him? and if thy wickednesses be multiplied, what shalt thou do against him?
JOB 35:7 Certainly if thou doest justly [[or rightwisely]], what shalt thou give to him; either what shall he take of thine hand?
JOB 35:8 Thy wickedness shall annoy a man, which is like thee; and thy right-wiseness shall help the son of a man.
JOB 35:9 Men shall cry for the multitude of false challengers, and they shall wail for the violence of the power of tyrants.
JOB 35:10 And Job said not, Where is God, that made me, and that gave songs in the night?
JOB 35:11 And the which teacheth us above the beasts of [[the]] earth, and he shall teach us above the birds of heaven.
JOB 35:12 There they shall cry, and God shall not hear them, for the pride of evil men.
JOB 35:13 For God shall not hear without cause, and Almighty God shall behold the causes of each man.
JOB 35:14 Yea, when thou sayest, He behold-eth not; be thou deemed before him, and abide thou him.
JOB 35:15 For now the Lord bringeth not in his strong vengeance, neither he avengeth felonies greatly here.
JOB 35:16 Therefore Job openeth his mouth in vain, and multiplieth words without knowing.
JOB 36:1 Also Elihu added, and spake these things,
JOB 36:2 Suffer thou me a little, and I shall show to thee; for yet I have that, that I shall speak for God.
JOB 36:3 I shall rehearse my knowing from the beginning; and I shall prove my worker just [[or rightwise]].
JOB 36:4 For verily my words be without leasing, and by them perfect knowing shall be proved to thee.
JOB 36:5 God casteth not away mighty men, since he is mighty;
JOB 36:6 but he saveth not wicked men, and he giveth doom to poor men.
JOB 36:7 He taketh not away his eyes from a just [[or rightwise]] man; and he setteth kings in their seat without end, and they be raised up there.
JOB 36:8 And if they be in chains, and be bound with the ropes of poverty,
JOB 36:9 he shall show to them their works, and their great trespasses; for they were violent, either raveners.
JOB 36:10 Also he shall open their ears, that he chastise them; and he shall speak to them, that they turn again from their wickedness.
JOB 36:11 If they hear him, and keep his behests, they shall full-fill their days in good, and their years in glory.
JOB 36:12 Soothly if they hear not, they shall pass away by sword, and they shall be wasted in folly.
JOB 36:13 Feigners and false men stir the wrath of God; and they shall not cry to God, and acknowledge their guilt, when they be bound.
JOB 36:14 The soul of them shall die in tempest; and the life of them among womanish men.
JOB 36:15 He shall deliver a poor man from his anguish; and he shall open his ear in tribulation.
JOB 36:16 Therefore he shall save thee from the strait mouth of the broadest tribulation, and not having a founda-ment under it; and the rest of thy table shall be full of fatness.
JOB 36:17 Thy cause is deemed as the cause of a wicked man; and thou shalt receive thy cause and thy doom.
JOB 36:18 Therefore wrath overcome thee not, that thou oppress any man; and the multitude of gifts bow thee not.
JOB 36:19 Put down thy greatness without tribulation, and put down all strong men by strength.
JOB 36:20 Delay thou not the night, that peoples go up for them.
JOB 36:21 Be thou ware, that thou bow not to wickedness; for thou hast begun to follow this wickedness after wretched-ness.
JOB 36:22 Lo! God is high in his strength, and none is like him among the givers of law.
JOB 36:23 Who may seek out the ways of God? either who dare say to him, Thou hast wrought wickedness?
JOB 36:24 Have thou mind, that thou knowest not his work, of whom men have sung.
JOB 36:25 All men see God; each man be-holdeth afar.
JOB 36:26 Lo! God is great, over-coming our knowing; the number of his years is without number.
JOB 36:27 He taketh the drops of rain; and he poureth out rains at the likeness of floodgates,
JOB 36:28 which come down of the clouds, that cover all things above.
JOB 36:29 If he will stretch forth clouds as his tent,
JOB 36:30 and lightning with his light from above, he shall cover, yea, the hinges of the sea.
JOB 36:31 For by these things he deemeth peoples, and giveth meat to many deadly men.
JOB 36:32 In hands he hideth light; and commandeth it, that it come again.
JOB 36:33 He telleth of it to his friend, that it is his possession; and that he may ascend [[or go up]] to it.
JOB 37:1 Mine heart dreaded of this thing, and is moved out of his place.
JOB 37:2 It shall hear an hearing in the fearedfulness of his voice, and a sound coming forth [[out]] of his mouth.
JOB 37:3 He beholdeth over all heavens; and his light is over the terms of the earth.
JOB 37:4 Great sound shall roar after him, and he shall thunder with the voice of his greatness; and it shall not be sought out, when his voice is heard.
JOB 37:5 God shall thunder in his voice wonderfully, which maketh great things that may not be sought out.
JOB 37:6 He it is that commandeth the snow to come down upon the earth, and to the rains of winter, and to the rains of his strength.
JOB 37:7 He marketh in the hand of all men, that all men know their works.
JOB 37:8 An unreasonable beast shall go into his den, and shall dwell in his cave, either dark place.
JOB 37:9 Tempest shall go out from the inner things, and cold from Arcturus, that is, a sign of five stars in the north.
JOB 37:10 When God maketh blowing, frost waxeth altogether; and again full broad waters be poured out thereof.
JOB 37:11 Wheat desireth clouds, and clouds spread abroad their light.
JOB 37:12 The which clouds compass all things about by compass, whither ever the will of the governor leadeth them, to all thing to which he commandeth them upon the face of the world;
JOB 37:13 whether in one lineage, either in his land, either in whatever place of his mercy he commandeth those [[or them]] to be found.
JOB 37:14 Job, hearken thou to these things; stand thou, and behold the marvels of God.
JOB 37:15 Whether thou knowest, when God commanded to the rains, that those [[or they]] shall show the light of his clouds?
JOB 37:16 Whether thou knowest the great ways of the clouds, and the perfect knowings of those?
JOB 37:17 Whether thy clothes be not hot, when the earth is blown with the south?
JOB 37:18 In hap thou madest with him heavens, which most firm be founded, as of brass.
JOB 37:19 Show thou to us, what we shall say to him; for we be wrapped in darknesses.
JOB 37:20 Who shall tell to him, what things I speak? yea, if he speaketh, a man shall be devoured.
JOB 37:21 And now men see not light; the air shall be made thick suddenly into clouds, and wind passing shall drive away those [[or them]].
JOB 37:22 Gold shall come from the north, and the fearedful praising of God.
JOB 37:23 For we may not find him worthily; he is great in strength, and in doom, and in rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], and he may not be told out.
JOB 37:24 Therefore men shall dread him; and all men, that seem to themselves to be wise, shall not be hardy to behold God.
JOB 38:1 Forsooth the Lord answered from the whirlwind to Job, and said,
JOB 38:2 Who is this man, wrapping together sentences with unwise words?
JOB 38:3 Gird thou as a man thy loins; I shall ask thee, and answer thou [[to]] me.
JOB 38:4 Where were thou, when I set the foundaments of the earth? show thou to me, if thou hast understanding.
JOB 38:5 Who setted [[the]] measurements thereof, if thou knowest? either who stretched forth a line thereupon?
JOB 38:6 Upon what thing be the founda-ments thereof made steadfast? either who sent down the cornerstone thereof,
JOB 38:7 when the morrow stars praised me together, and all the sons of God sang joyfully?
JOB 38:8 Who enclosed altogether the sea with doors, when it brake out coming forth as of the womb?
JOB 38:9 When I setted a cloud the cover-ing thereof, and I wrapped it with darkness, as with ‘clothes of young childhood.
JOB 38:10 I encompassed it with my terms, and I setted [[or set]] a bar, and doors;
JOB 38:11 and I said, Hitherto thou shalt come, and thou shalt not go further; and here thou shalt break altogether thy swelling waves.
JOB 38:12 Whether after thy birth thou commandedest to the beginning of the day, and showedest to the morrow-tide his place?
JOB 38:13 Whether thou heldest shaking together the last parts of [[the]] earth, and shakedest away [[the]] wicked men therefrom?
JOB 38:14 A sealing shall be restored as clay, and it shall stand as a cloth.
JOB 38:15 The light of wicked men shall be taken away from them, and an high arm shall be broken.
JOB 38:16 Whether thou hast entered into the depth of the sea, and hast walked in the last parts of the depth, that is, the ocean, or the great west sea?
JOB 38:17 Whether the gates of death be opened to thee, and thou hast seen the dark doors?
JOB 38:18 Whether thou hast beheld the breadth of the earth? Show thou to me, if thou knowest all things,
JOB 38:19 in what way the light dwelleth, and which is the place of darkness;
JOB 38:20 that thou lead out each thing to his terms, and that thou understand the ways of his house.
JOB 38:21 Knewest thou then, that thou shouldest be born, and knew thou the number of thy days?
JOB 38:22 Whether thou enteredest into the treasures of snow, either beheldest thou the treasures of hail?
JOB 38:23 which things I made ready into the time of an enemy, into the day of fighting and of battle.
JOB 38:24 By what way is the light spread abroad, and by what way heat is parted upon earth?
JOB 38:25 Who gave course to the strongest rain, and way of the thunder sounding?
JOB 38:26 That it should rain on the earth without man, in desert, where none of deadly men dwelleth?
JOB 38:27 That it should [[ful]] fill a land without a way and desolate, and should bring forth green herbs?
JOB 38:28 Who is [[the]] father of rain, either who engendered the drops of dew?
JOB 38:29 Of whose womb went out ice, and who begat frost from heaven?
JOB 38:30 Waters be made hard in the likeness of [[a]] stone, and the over-part of [[the]] ocean is constrained together.
JOB 38:31 Whether thou shalt be able to join together [[the]] shining stars Pleiades, that is, the seven stars, either thou shalt be able to destroy the compass of Arcturus?
JOB 38:32 Whether thou bringest forth Lucifer, that is, the day star, in his time, and makest the even star to rise upon the sons of [[the]] earth?
JOB 38:33 Whether thou knowest the order of heaven, and shall set the reason thereof in [[the]] earth?
JOB 38:34 Whether thou shalt raise thy voice into a cloud, and the fierceness of waters shall cover thee?
JOB 38:35 Whether thou shalt send out lightnings, and they shall go forth, and those [[or they]] shall turn again, and shall say to thee, We be present?
JOB 38:36 Who hath put wisdom to the entrails of man, that is, soul, either who gave understanding to the cock?
JOB 38:37 Who shall tell out the reason of heavens, and who shall make [[the]] according of heaven to sleep?
JOB 38:38 When dust was founded on the earth, and clots were joined together?
JOB 38:39 Whether thou shalt take [[the]] prey to the lioness, and shalt fill the souls of her whelps,
JOB 38:40 when they lie in caves, and espy in dens?
JOB 38:41 Who maketh ready for the crow his meat, when his young cry to God, and wander about, for they have not meats?
JOB 39:1 Whether thou knowest the time of [[the]] birth of wild goats in stones, either hast thou espied hinds bringing forth calves?
JOB 39:2 Hast thou numbered the months of their conceiving, and hast thou known the time of their calving?
JOB 39:3 They be bowed down to [[the]] calf, and so calve; and they send out then roarings.
JOB 39:4 Their calves be separated from them, and go forth to pasture; they go out, and they turn not again to their mothers.
JOB 39:5 Who hath let the wild ass go free, and who hath loosed the bonds of him?
JOB 39:6 To whom I have given an house in wilderness, and the tabernacles of him in the land of saltness.
JOB 39:7 He despiseth the multitude of the city; he heareth not the cry of the asker.
JOB 39:8 He looketh about the hills of his pasture, and he seeketh all green things.
JOB 39:9 Whether an unicorn shall desire to serve thee, either shall dwell at thy cratch?
JOB 39:10 Whether thou shalt bind the unicorn with thy chain, for to ear thy land, either shall he break the clots of the valleys after thee?
JOB 39:11 Whether thou shalt have trust in his great strength, and shalt thou leave to him thy travails?
JOB 39:12 Whether thou shalt believe to him, that he shall yield seed to thee, and shall gather together for thy cornfloor?
JOB 39:13 The feather of an ostrich is like the feathers of a gyrfalcon, and of an hawk;
JOB 39:14 the which ostrich forsaketh his eggs in the earth, in hap thou shalt make those [[or them]] hot in the dust.
JOB 39:15 He forgetteth, that a foot treadeth those eggs, either that a beast of the field all-breaketh them.
JOB 39:16 He is made hard to his young, as if they were not his; he travailed in vain, while no dread constrained him.
JOB 39:17 For God hath deprived him from wisdom, and he hath not given under-standing to him.
JOB 39:18 When time is, he raiseth the wings on high; he scorneth the horse, and his rider.
JOB 39:19 Whether thou shalt give strength to an horse, either shalt give neighing about his neck?
JOB 39:20 Whether thou shalt raise him as locusts? The glory of his nostrils is dreaded.
JOB 39:21 He diggeth [[the]] earth with his foot, he full out joyeth; and he goeth boldly against [[the]] armed men.
JOB 39:22 He despiseth fearedfulness, and he giveth not stead to [[the]] sword.
JOB 39:23 An arrow case shall sound upon him; a spear and a shield shall shine.
JOB 39:24 He is hot, or fervent, and gnasheth, and swalloweth the earth; and he areckoneth not that the cry of the trump soundeth.
JOB 39:25 When he heareth a clarion, he saith, Joy! he smelleth battle afar; the exciting of dukes, and the yelling of the host.
JOB 39:26 Whether an hawk spreading abroad his wings to the south, beginneth to have feathers by thy wisdom?
JOB 39:27 Whether an eagle shall be raised up at thy commandment, and shall set [[or put]] his nest in high places?
JOB 39:28 He dwelleth in stones, and he abideth in flints broken before, and in rocks, to which men may not nigh.
JOB 39:29 From thence he beholdeth meat and his eyes look from [[a]] far.
JOB 39:30 His young suck blood, and wherever a carrion is, anon he is present.
JOB 40:1 And the Lord added to, and spake to Job, and said,
JOB 40:2 Whether he, that striveth with God, shall have rest so lightly? Soothly he, that reproveth God, oweth for to answer to him.
JOB 40:3 And Job answered to the Lord, and said,
JOB 40:4 What may I answer, which have spoken lightly, that is, undiscreetly and follily? I shall put mine hand upon my mouth.
JOB 40:5 I spake one thing, which thing I would, that I had not said; and I spake another thing, to which I shall no more add.
JOB 40:6 Forsooth the Lord answered to Job from the whirlwind, and said,
JOB 40:7 Gird thou as a man thy loins, and I shall ask thee, and show thou to me.
JOB 40:8 Whether thou shalt make void my doom, and shalt thou condemn me, that thou be made just [[or be justified]]?
JOB 40:9 And if thou hast an arm, or power, as God hath, and if thou thunderest with like voice,
JOB 40:10 take thou fairness about thee, and be thou raised on high, and be thou glorious, and be thou clothed in fair clothes.
JOB 40:11 And destroy thou proud men in thy fierce vengeance, and behold thou, and make low each boaster.
JOB 40:12 Behold thou all proud men, and shame thou them; and all-break thou wicked men in their place.
JOB 40:13 Hide thou them in dust together, and drown down their faces into a ditch.
JOB 40:14 And then I shall acknowledge, that thy right hand may save thee.
JOB 40:15 Lo! behemoth, whom I made with thee, shall as an ox eat hay.
JOB 40:16 His strength is in his loins, and his might is in the navel of his womb.
JOB 40:17 He constraineth his tail as a cedar; the sinews of his stones of engendering be folded together.
JOB 40:18 His bones be as pipes of brass; the gristle of him is as plates of iron.
JOB 40:19 He is the beginning of the ways of God; he, that made him, shall set his sword to him.
JOB 40:20 Hills bear herbs to this behemoth; all the beasts of the field play there.
JOB 40:21 He sleepeth under shadow, in the private of a reed, in moist places.
JOB 40:22 Shadows cover his shadow; the sallows of the river encompass him.
JOB 40:23 He shall swallow up the flood, and he shall not wonder; he hath trust, that Jordan shall flow into his mouth.
JOB 40:24 He shall take them by his eyes, as by an hook; and by sharp shafts he shall pierce his nostrils.
JOB 41:1 Whether thou shalt be able to draw out Leviathan with an hook, and shalt bind with a rope his tongue?
JOB 41:2 Whether thou shalt put a ring in his nostrils, either shalt pierce his cheek[[bone]] with an hook?
JOB 41:3 Whether he shall multiply prayers to thee, either shall speak soft things to thee?
JOB 41:4 Whether he shall make a covenant with thee, and shalt thou take him for a servant everlasting?
JOB 41:5 Whether thou shalt scorn him as a bird, either shalt thou bind him to thine handmaidens?
JOB 41:6 Shall friends carve him, shall merchants part him?
JOB 41:7 Whether thou shalt fill nets with his skin, and a fish basket with his head?
JOB 41:8 Shalt thou put thine hand upon him? have thou mind of the battle, and add thou no more to speak.
JOB 41:9 Lo! his hope shall deceive him; and in the sight of all men he shall be cast down.
JOB 41:10 I not as cruel shall raise him; for who may against-stand my face?
JOB 41:11 And who gave to me before, that I yield to him? All things, that be under heaven, be mine.
JOB 41:12 I shall not spare him for his mighty words, and made fair to beseech with.
JOB 41:13 Who shall show the face of his clothing, and who shall enter into the midst of his mouth?
JOB 41:14 Who shall open the gates of his cheer? fearedfulness is by the compass of his teeth.
JOB 41:15 His body is as molten shields of brass, and joined together with scales overlaying themselves.
JOB 41:16 One is joined to another; and soothly breathing goeth not through those [[or them]].
JOB 41:17 One shall cleave to another, and those pieces holding together them-selves shall not be parted.
JOB 41:18 His sneezing or snorting is as shining of fire, and his eyes be as eyelids of the morrowtide.
JOB 41:19 Lights come forth of his mouth, as brands of fire, that be kindled.
JOB 41:20 Smoke cometh forth of his nostrils, as a boiling pot set upon the fire.
JOB 41:21 His breath maketh coals to burn, and flame goeth out of his mouth.
JOB 41:22 Strength shall dwell in his neck, and neediness shall go away from before his face.
JOB 41:23 The members of his flesh be cleaving together to themselves; God shall send floods against him, and those [[or they]] shall not be borne over to another place.
JOB 41:24 His heart shall be made hard as a stone; and it shall be constrained together as the anvil of a smith.
JOB 41:25 When he shall be taken away, angels shall dread; and they afeared shall be purged.
JOB 41:26 When sword taketh him, it may not stand, neither spear, neither habergeon.
JOB 41:27 For he shall areckon iron as chaff, and brass as rotten wood.
JOB 41:28 A man archer shall not drive him away; [[the]] stones of a sling be turned into stubble to him.
JOB 41:29 He shall areckon an hammer as stubble; and he shall scorn a flourishing spear.
JOB 41:30 The beams of the sun shall be under him; and he shall strew to him-self gold as clay.
JOB 41:31 He shall make the deep sea to boil as a pot; and he shall put it, as when ointments boil.
JOB 41:32 A path shall shine after him; he shall guess the great ocean as waxing eld [[or old]].
JOB 41:33 No power there is on earth, that shall be comparisoned to him; which is made, that he should dread nothing.
JOB 41:34 He seeth all high thing[[s]]; he is king over all the sons of pride.
JOB 42:1 Forsooth Job answered to the Lord, and said,
JOB 42:2 I know, that thou mayest do all things, and that no thought or nothing is hid from thee.
JOB 42:3 Who is this, that covereth counsel without knowing? Therefore I have spoken unwisely, and those things that pass over-measure my knowing.
JOB 42:4 Hear thou, and I shall speak; I shall ask thee, and answer thou to me.
JOB 42:5 By hearing of ear I have heard thee, but now mine eye seeth thee.
JOB 42:6 Therefore I reprove myself, and do penance in dead spark and ashes.
JOB 42:7 And after that the Lord had spoken these words to Job, he said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My strong vengeance is wroth against thee, and against thy two friends; for ye have not spoken before me rightful [[or right]] things, as my servant Job.
JOB 42:8 Therefore take ye to you seven bulls, and seven rams; and go ye to my servant Job, and offer ye burnt sacrifice for you. Forsooth Job, my servant, shall pray for you; I shall receive his face, that folly be not areckoned to you; certainly ye have not spoken before me rightful [[or right]] thing, as hath my servant Job.
JOB 42:9 Therefore Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, went, and did, as the Lord had spoken to them; and the Lord received the face of Job.
JOB 42:10 Also the Lord was converted to the penance of Job, when he prayed for his friends. And the Lord added all things double, whichever were of Job.
JOB 42:11 And all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all that knew him before, came to him; and they ate bread with him in his house, and they moved their head upon him; and they comforted him on all the evil, that the Lord had brought in upon him; and they gave to him each man a sheep, and a golden earring.
JOB 42:12 Forsooth the Lord blessed the last things of Job, more than the beginning of him; and fourteen thousand of sheep were made to him, and six thousand of camels, and a thousand yokes of oxen, and a thousand female asses.
JOB 42:13 And he had seven sons, and three daughters;
JOB 42:14 and he called the name of the one daughter Jemima, and the name of the second daughter Kezia, and the name of the third daughter he called Kerenhappuch, that is, a horn of women’s ointment.
JOB 42:15 And there were not found so fair women in all the land, as were the daughters of Job; and their father gave heritage to them among their brethren.
JOB 42:16 Forsooth Job lived after these beatings, or scourgings, an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and the sons of his sons, till to the fourth generation;
JOB 42:17 and he was dead eld [[or he died old]], and full of days, that is, he had length and prosperity of life.
PSA 1:1 Blessed is the man, that goeth not in the counsel of wicked men; and stood not in the way of sinners, and sat not in the chair of pestilence.
PSA 1:2 But his will is in the law of the Lord; and he shall bethink in the law of him day and night.
PSA 1:3 And he shall be as a tree, which is planted beside the runnings of waters; that shall give his fruit in his time. And his leaf shall not fall down; and all things, whichever he shall do, shall have prosperity.
PSA 1:4 Not so wicked men, not so; but they be as dust, which the wind casteth away from the face of the earth.
PSA 1:5 Therefore wicked men rise not again in doom; neither sinners in the council of just men [[nor the sinful in the council of the rightwise]].
PSA 1:6 For the Lord knoweth the way of just men [[or the rightwise]]; and the way of wicked men shall perish.
PSA 2:1 Why gnashed with teeth heathen men; and peoples thought vain things?
PSA 2:2 The kings of earth stood together; and princes came together against the Lord, and against his Christ.
PSA 2:3 Break we the bonds of them; and cast we away the yoke of them from us.
PSA 2:4 He that dwelleth in heavens shall scorn them; and the Lord shall bemock them.
PSA 2:5 Then he shall speak to them in his wrath; and he shall trouble them in his strong vengeance.
PSA 2:6 Soothly I am ordained of him a king upon Zion, his holy hill;
PSA 2:7 preaching his commandment. The Lord said to me, Thou art my son; I have begotten thee today.
PSA 2:8 Ask thou of me, and I shall give to thee heathen men for thine heritage; and for thy possession the terms of earth.
PSA 2:9 Thou shalt govern them in an iron rod; and thou shalt break them altogether as the vessel of a potter.
PSA 2:10 And now, ye kings, understand; ye that deem the earth, be ye learned.
PSA 2:11 Serve ye the Lord with dread; and make ye full out joy to him with trembling.
PSA 2:12 Take ye lore of chastising; lest the Lord be wroth sometime, and ye perish from the just way. When his wrath shall burn out in short time; blessed be all they, that trust in him.
PSA 3:1 The psalm of David, when he fled from the face of Absalom, his son. Lord, why be they multiplied that trouble me? many men rise against me.
PSA 3:2 Many men say of my soul, None health there is to him in his God.
PSA 3:3 But thou, Lord, art mine up-taker; my glory, and enhancing mine head.
PSA 3:4 With my voice I cried to the Lord; and he heard me from his holy hill.
PSA 3:5 I slept, and rested, and I rose up; for the Lord received me.
PSA 3:6 I shall not dread thousands of people encompassing me;
PSA 3:7 Lord, arise thou; my God, make me safe. For thou hast smitten all men being adversaries to me without cause; thou hast all-broken the teeth of sinners.
PSA 3:8 Health is of the Lord; and thy blessing is on thy people.
PSA 4:1 To the victory, in organs, the psalm of David. When I inwardly called, God of my rightwiseness heard me; in tribulation thou hast alarged to me. Have thou mercy on me; and hear thou my prayer.
PSA 4:2 Sons of men, how long be ye of heavy heart? why love ye vanity, and seek leasing?
PSA 4:3 And know ye, that the Lord hath made marvellous his holy man; the Lord shall hear me, when I shall cry to him.
PSA 4:4 Be ye wroth, and do not ye sin; and for those evils to which ye say in your hearts and in your beds, be ye compunct.
PSA 4:5 Sacrifice ye the sacrifice or Offer ye an offering of rightfulness [[or right-wiseness]], and hope ye in the Lord;
PSA 4:6 many say, Who showed good things to us? Lord, the light of thy cheer is marked upon us;
PSA 4:7 thou hast given gladness in mine heart. They be multiplied of the fruit of wheat, and of wine; and of their oil.
PSA 4:8 In peace in the same thing; I shall sleep, and take rest. For thou, Lord; hast set me singularly or only in hope.
PSA 5:1 To the overcomer, on the heritages, the psalm of David. Lord, perceive thou my words with ears; understand thou my cry.
PSA 5:2 My King, and my God; give thou attention to the voice of my prayer. For, Lord, I shall pray to thee;
PSA 5:3 hear thou early my voice. Early I shall stand nigh to thee, and I shall see;
PSA 5:4 for thou art God not desiring wickedness. Neither an evil-willed man shall dwell beside thee;
PSA 5:5 neither unjust [[or unrightwise]] men shall dwell before thine eyes. Thou hatest all them that work wickedness;
PSA 5:6 thou shalt lose them that speak leasing. The Lord shall hold abomin-able a man-queller, and a guileful man.
PSA 5:7 But Lord, in the multitude of thy mercy, I shall enter into thine house; I shall worship toward thine holy temple in thy dread.
PSA 5:8 Lord, lead thou forth me in thy rightwiseness for mine enemies; dress thou my way in thy sight.
PSA 5:9 For truth is not in their mouth; their heart is vain. Their throat is an open sepulchre, they did guilefully with their tongues;
PSA 5:10 God, deem thou them. Fall they down from their thoughts; after the multitude of their wickednesses, or un-piousnesses, cast thou them down; for, Lord, they have stirred thee to wrath.
PSA 5:11 And all that hope in thee, be they glad; they shall make full out joy [[into]] without end, and thou shalt dwell in them. And all that love thy name shall have glory in thee;
PSA 5:12 for thou shalt bless the just [[or right-wise]] man. Lord, thou hast crowned us, as with a shield of thy good will.
PSA 6:1 To the overcomer in psalms, the psalm of David, on the eighth. Lord, reprove thou not me in thy strong vengeance; neither chastise thou me in thine ire.
PSA 6:2 Lord, have thou mercy on me, for I am sick; Lord, make thou me whole, for all my bones be troubled.
PSA 6:3 And my soul is troubled greatly; but thou, Lord, how long?
PSA 6:4 Lord, be thou converted or turned again, and deliver my soul; make thou me safe, for thy mercy.
PSA 6:5 For none there is in death, that is mindful of thee; but in hell who shall acknowledge to thee?
PSA 6:6 I travailed in my wailing, I shall wash my bed by each night; I shall moisten, either make wet, my bedstraw with my tears.
PSA 6:7 Mine eye is troubled of strong vengeance; I waxed eld or old among all mine enemies.
PSA 6:8 All ye that work wickedness, depart from me; for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping.
PSA 6:9 The Lord hath heard my beseech-ing; the Lord hath received my prayer.
PSA 6:10 All mine enemies be ashamed, and be troubled greatly; be they turned altogether, and be they ashamed full swiftly.
PSA 7:1 For the ignorance of David, which he sang to the Lord, on the words of Ethiopian, the son of Benjamin. My Lord God, I have hoped in thee; make thou me safe from all that pursue me, and deliver thou me.
PSA 7:2 Lest any time he as a lion ravish my soul; while none there is that again-buyeth, neither that maketh safe.
PSA 7:3 My Lord God, if I did this thing, if wickedness is in mine hands, or works;
PSA 7:4 if I yielded to men yielding to me evils, fall I by deserving void from mine enemies;
PSA 7:5 mine enemy pursue he my soul, and take he, and defoul my life in earth; and bring my glory into dust.
PSA 7:6 Lord, rise thou up in thine ire; and be thou raised up in the coasts of mine enemies. And, my Lord God, rise thou up in the commandment, which thou hast commanded;
PSA 7:7 and the synagogue of peoples shall encompass thee. And for this go thou again on high;
PSA 7:8 the Lord deemeth peoples. Lord, deem thou me by my rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and by mine innocence on me.
PSA 7:9 The wickedness of sinners be ended; and thou, God, seeking the hearts, that is, thoughts, and reins, that is, delightings, shall dress a just [[or rightwise]] man.
PSA 7:10 My just [[or rightwise]] help is of the Lord; that maketh safe rightful men in heart.
PSA 7:11 The Lord is a just [[or rightwise]] judge, strong and patient; whether he is wroth by all days?
PSA 7:12 If ye be not converted, he shall flourish his sword; he hath bent his bow, and made it ready.
PSA 7:13 And therein he hath made ready the vessels of death; he hath fully made his arrows with burning things.
PSA 7:14 Lo! the wicked hath conceived sorrow; he painfully hath brought forth unrightfulness [[or unrightwiseness]], and he hath childed wickedness.
PSA 7:15 He opened a pit, and digged it out; and he fell into the ditch which he made.
PSA 7:16 His sorrow shall be turned into his head; and his wickedness shall come down into his neck.
PSA 7:17 I shall acknowledge to the Lord by his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and I shall sing to the name of the highest Lord.
PSA 8:1 To the overcomer, for[[the]]pressers[[or wine presses]], the psalm of David. Lord, thou art our Lord; thy name is full wonderful in all [[the]] earth. For thy great doing is raised up, above heavens.
PSA 8:2 Of the mouth of young children, not speaking and sucking milk, thou hast made perfect praising, for thine enemies; that thou destroy the enemy and the avenger.
PSA 8:3 For I shall see thine heavens, the works of thy fingers; the moon and the stars, which thou hast founded.
PSA 8:4 What is a man, that is mankind, that thou art mindful of him; either the son of a virgin [[or the son of man]], for thou visitest him?
PSA 8:5 Thou hast made him a little less than angels; thou hast crowned him with glory and honour,
PSA 8:6 and thou hast ordained him above the works of thine hands. Thou hast made subject all things under his feet;
PSA 8:7 all sheep and oxen, furthermore and the beasts of the field;
PSA 8:8 the birds of the air, and the fishes of the sea, and all the other creatures that pass by the paths of the sea.
PSA 8:9 Lord, our Lord; how wonderful is thy name in all [[the]] earth.
PSA 9:1 Into the end, for the privates of the son, the psalm of David. Lord, I shall acknowledge to thee in all mine heart; I shall tell all thy marvels.
PSA 9:2 Thou Highest, I shall be glad, and I shall be fully joyful [[or full out joy]] in thee; I shall sing to thy name.
PSA 9:3 For thou turnest mine enemy aback; they shall be made feeble, and shall perish from thy face.
PSA 9:4 For thou hast made my doom, and my cause; thou, that deemest rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], hast set on the throne.
PSA 9:5 Thou hast blamed heathen men, and the wicked perished; thou hast done away the name of them into the world, and into the world of world.
PSA 9:6 The swords of the enemy have failed into the end; and thou hast destroyed the cities of them. The mind of them hath perished with sound;
PSA 9:7 and the Lord dwelleth without end. He hath made ready his throne in doom;
PSA 9:8 and he shall deem the world in equity, he shall deem peoples in rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]].
PSA 9:9 And the Lord is made refuge, either help, to a poor man; an helper in covenable times in tribulation.
PSA 9:10 And they, that know thy name, have hope in thee; for thou, Lord, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.
PSA 9:11 Sing ye [[psalms]] to the Lord, that dwelleth in Zion; tell ye his studies among heathen men.
PSA 9:12 God forgetteth not the cry of poor men; for he hath mind of them, and he seeketh the blood of them.
PSA 9:13 Lord, have thou mercy on me; see thou my meekness of mine enemies. Which enhancest me from the gates of death;
PSA 9:14 that I tell all thy praisings in the gates of the daughter of Zion. I shall be fully joyful or joy fully in thine health;
PSA 9:15 heathen men be fast-set in the perishing, which they made. In this snare, which they hid, the foot of them is caught.
PSA 9:16 The Lord making dooms shall be known; the sinner is taken in the works of his hands.
PSA 9:17 Sinners be turned altogether into hell; all folks, that forget God.
PSA 9:18 For the forgetting of a poor man shall not be into the end; the patience of poor men shall not perish into the end.
PSA 9:19 Lord, rise thou up, a man be not comforted; [[the]] folks be deemed in thy sight.
PSA 9:20 Lord, ordain thou a law-maker upon them; know folks, that they be men.
PSA 10:1 Lord, why hast thou gone far away? thou despisest us in covenable times in tribulation.
PSA 10:2 While the wicked man waxeth proud, the poor man is burnt; they be taken in the wicked counsels, which they thinked.
PSA 10:3 For why the sinner is praised in the desires of his soul; and the wicked is blessed. The sinner hath stirred the Lord to wrath;
PSA 10:4 after the multitude of his wrath, he shall not seek after God. God is not in his sight;
PSA 10:5 his ways be defouled in all time. Thy dooms be taken away from his face; he shall be lord of all his enemies.
PSA 10:6 For he said in his heart, I shall not be moved, from generation into gener-ation without evil.
PSA 10:7 Whose mouth is full of cursing, and of bitterness, and of guile; travail and sorrow is under his tongue.
PSA 10:8 He sitteth in ambushes with rich men in privates; to slay the innocent man. His eyes behold cruelly on the poor man;
PSA 10:9 he setteth ambushes in hid place, as a lion in his den. He setteth ambushes, for to ravish a poor man; for to ravish a poor man, while he draweth in the poor man. In his snare he shall make meek the poor man;
PSA 10:10 he shall bow himself down, and he shall fall, when he hath been lord of poor men.
PSA 10:11 For he said in his heart, God hath forgotten; he hath turned away his face, that he see not into the end.
PSA 10:12 Lord God, rise thou up, and thine hand be enhanced; forget thou not poor men.
PSA 10:13 For what thing stirred the wicked man God to wrath? for he said in his heart, God shall not seek.
PSA 10:14 Thou seest, for thou beholdest travail and sorrow; that thou take them into thine hands. The poor man is left to thee; thou shalt be an helper to the fatherless and motherless.
PSA 10:15 All-break thou the arm of the sinner, and evil-willed; his sin shall be sought, and it shall not be found.
PSA 10:16 The Lord shall reign without end, and into the world of world; folks, ye shall perish from the land of him.
PSA 10:17 The Lord hath heard the desire of poor men; thine ear hath heard the making ready of their heart.
PSA 10:18 To deem for the motherless and meek; that a man presume no more to make himself great on earth.
PSA 11:1 To the victory, [[the psalm]]of David. I trust in the Lord; how say ye to my soul, Pass thou over into the hill, as a sparrow doeth?
PSA 11:2 For lo! sinners have bent a bow; they have made ready their arrows in an arrow case; that they shoot in darkness the rightful men in heart.
PSA 11:3 For they have destroyed, whom thou hast made perfect; but what did the rightful [[or rightwise]] man?
PSA 11:4 The Lord is in his holy temple; he is Lord, his seat is in heaven. His eyes behold on the poor man; his eyelids ask the sons of men.
PSA 11:5 The Lord asketh a just [[or right-wise]] man, and an unfaithful man; but he, that loveth wickedness, hateth his soul.
PSA 11:6 He shall rain snares upon sinners; fire, and brimstone, and the spirit of tempests be the part of the cup of them.
PSA 11:7 For the Lord is just [[or rightwise]], and loveth rightfulnesses [[or rightwise-ness]]; his cheer hath seen evenness, or equity.
PSA 12:1 To the victory, on the eighth, the song of David. Lord, make thou me safe, for the holy man failed; for truths be made little from the sons of men.
PSA 12:2 They spake vain things, each man to his neighbour; and they having guileful lips, spake in their heart, and with their heart.
PSA 12:3 The Lord destroy all guileful lips; and the great speaking tongue.
PSA 12:4 Which said, We shall magnify with our tongue, our lips be of us-selves; who else is our lord?
PSA 12:5 For the wretchedness of needy men, and for the wailing of poor men; now I shall rise up, saith the Lord. I shall set him in health; I shall do trustily in him.
PSA 12:6 The speeches of the Lord be chaste speeches; silver assayed by fire, proved from the earth, purged sevenfold.
PSA 12:7 Thou, Lord, shalt keep us; and thou shalt keep us from this gener-ation without end.
PSA 12:8 Wicked men go in compass; by thine highness thou hast multiplied the sons of men.
PSA 13:1 To the victory, [[the psalm]]of David. Lord, how long forgettest thou me, into the end? how long turnest thou away thy face from me?
PSA 13:2 How long shall I set counsel in my soul; sorrow in my heart by day? How long shall mine enemy be raised up on me?
PSA 13:3 My Lord God, behold thou, and hear thou me. Lighten thou mine eyes, lest any time I sleep in death;
PSA 13:4 lest any time mine enemy say, I had the mastery against him. They, that trouble me, shall have joy, if I shall be stirred;
PSA 13:5 but I hoped in thy mercy. Mine heart shall fully have joy in thine health;
PSA 13:6 I shall sing to the Lord, that giveth goods to me, and I shall say psalm to the name of the highest Lord.
PSA 14:1 To the victory, [[the psalm]]of David. The unwise man said in his heart, God is not. They be corrupt, and they be made abominable in their studies; none there is that doeth good, none is till to one.
PSA 14:2 The Lord beheld from heaven on the sons of men; that he see, if any is understanding, either seeking God.
PSA 14:3 All bowed away, altogether they be made unprofitable; none is that doeth good, none is till to one. The throat of them is an open sepulchre, they did guilefully with their tongues; the venom of snakes is under their lips. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; their feet be swift to shed out blood. Sorrow and cursed-ness is in the ways of them, and they knew not the way of peace; the dread of God is not before their eyes.
PSA 14:4 Whether all men that work wicked-ness shall not know; that devour my people, as meat of bread? They called not the Lord;
PSA 14:5 they trembled there for dread, where was no dread; for the Lord is in a rightful [[or rightwise]] generation.
PSA 14:6 Thou hast shamed the counsel of a poor man; for the Lord is his hope.
PSA 14:7 Who shall give from Zion health to Israel? When the Lord hath turned away the captivity of his people; Jacob shall fully be joyful or shall full out joy, and Israel shall be glad.
PSA 15:1 The psalm of David. Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle; either who shall rest in thine holy hill?
PSA 15:2 He that entereth without wem; and worketh rightfulness [[or rightwise-ness]]. He that speaketh truth in his heart;
PSA 15:3 which did not guile in his tongue. Nor did evil to his neighbour; and took not reproof against his neighbours.
PSA 15:4 A wicked man is brought to nought in his sight; but he glorifieth them that dread the Lord. He that sweareth to his neighbour, and deceiveth him not;
PSA 15:5 which gave not his money to usury; and took not gifts upon the innocent. He, that doeth these things, shall not be moved without end.
PSA 16:1 Of the meek and simple, the psalm of David. Lord, keep thou me, for I have hoped in thee;
PSA 16:2 I said to the Lord, Thou art my God; for thou hast no need of my goods.
PSA 16:3 To the saints that be in the land of him; he made wonderful all my wills in them.
PSA 16:4 The sicknesses of them be multi-plied; afterward they hasted. I shall not gather together the conventicles, or small covents, of them of bloods; and I shall not be mindful of their names by my lips.
PSA 16:5 The Lord is[[the]] part of mine heritage, and of my passion; thou art, that shall restore mine heritage to me.
PSA 16:6 Cords felled to me in full clear things; for mine heritage is full clear to me.
PSA 16:7 I shall bless the Lord, that hath given understanding to me; furthermore and my reins have blamed me unto the night.
PSA 16:8 I saw before me ever[[more]] the Lord in my sight; for he is at the right half to me, that I be not moved.
PSA 16:9 For this thing mine heart was glad, and my tongue joyed fully; further-more and my flesh shall rest in hope.
PSA 16:10 For thou shalt not leave my soul in hell; neither thou shalt give thine holy man to see corruption.
PSA 16:11 Thou hast made known to me the ways of life; thou shalt [[full-]]fill me with gladness with thy cheer; delight-ings be in thy right half unto the end.
PSA 17:1 The prayer of David. Lord, hear thou my rightfulness; behold thou my prayer. Perceive thou with ears my prayer; not made in guileful lips.
PSA 17:2 My doom come forth of thy cheer; thine eyes see they equity.
PSA 17:3 Thou hast proved mine heart, and hast visited me in [[the]] night; thou hast examined, or assayed, me by fire, and wickedness is not found in me.
PSA 17:4 That my mouth speak not of the works of men; for the words of thy lips I have kept hard ways.
PSA 17:5 Make thou perfect my goings in thy paths; that my steps be not moved.
PSA 17:6 I cried, for thou, God, heardest me; bow down thy ear to me, and hear thou my words.
PSA 17:7 Make wonderful thy mercies; that makest safe them that hope in thee.
PSA 17:8 Keep thou me as the apple of thine eye; and from them that against-stand thy right hand. Cover thou me under the shadow of thy wings;
PSA 17:9 from the face of unpious men, that have tormented me. Mine enemies have encompassed my soul;
PSA 17:10 they have closed together their fatness; the mouth of them spake pride.
PSA 17:11 They casted me forth, and have en-compassed me now; they ordained to bow down their eyes into [[the]] earth.
PSA 17:12 They, as a lion made ready to his prey, have taken me; and as the whelp of a lion dwelling in hid places.
PSA 17:13 Lord, rise thou up, before come thou him, and deceive or overturn thou him; deliver thou my life from the unpious, deliver thou thy sword;
PSA 17:14 from the enemies of thine hand. Lord, part thou them from a few men of the land in the life of them; their womb is [[full-]]filled of thine hid things. They be [[full-]]filled with sons; and they left their remnants, either residue, to their little children.
PSA 17:15 But I in rightfulness [[or rightwise-ness]] shall appear to thy sight; I shall be [[ful]] filled, when thy glory shall appear.
PSA 18:1 To victory, the word of the Lord to David, which spake the words of this song, in the day in which the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul; and he said: Lord, my strength, I shall love thee;
PSA 18:2 the Lord is my steadfastness, and my refuge, and my deliverer. My God is mine helper; and I shall hope in him. My defender, and the horn of mine health; and mine up-taker.
PSA 18:3 I shall praise, and inwardly call the Lord; and I shall be safe from mine enemies.
PSA 18:4 The sorrows of death encompassed me; and the strands [[or streams]] of wickedness have troubled me.
PSA 18:5 The sorrows of hell encompassed me; the snares of death before-occupied me.
PSA 18:6 In my tribulation I inwardly called the Lord; and I cried to my God. And he heard my voice from his holy temple; and my cry in his sight entered into his ears.
PSA 18:7 The earth was moved together, and trembled greatly; the foundaments of hills were troubled altogether, and moved together, for he was wroth to them.
PSA 18:8 Smoke went up in the ire [[or wrath]] of the Lord, and fire burnt out from his face; coals were kindled of him.
PSA 18:9 He bowed down heavens, and came down; and darkness was under his feet.
PSA 18:10 And he ascended [[or went]] on cherubim, and flew; he flew over the pens of winds.
PSA 18:11 And he setted [[or put]] darknesses his hiding place, his tabernacle in his compass; and dark water was in the clouds of the air.
PSA 18:12 Full clear clouds passed in his sight; hail and the coals of fire.
PSA 18:13 And the Lord thundered from heaven; and the Highest gave his voice, hail and coals of fire.
PSA 18:14 And he sent his arrows, and destroyed those men; he multiplied lightnings, and troubled those men.
PSA 18:15 And the wells of waters appeared; and the foundaments of the earth were showed. Lord, of thy blaming; of the breathing of the spirit of thine ire.
PSA 18:16 He sent from the highest place, and took me; and he took me from many waters.
PSA 18:17 He delivered me from my strongest enemies; and from them that hated me, for they were comforted on me.
PSA 18:18 They came before me in the day of my torment; and the Lord was made my defender.
PSA 18:19 And he led out me into breadth; he made me safe, for he would me.
PSA 18:20 And the Lord shall yield to me by my rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and he shall yield to me by the cleanness of mine hands.
PSA 18:21 For I kept the ways of the Lord; and I did not go away unfaithfully from my God.
PSA 18:22 For all his dooms be in my sight; and I putted not away from me his rightfulnesses [[or rightwisenesses]].
PSA 18:23 And I shall be unwemmed with him; and I shall keep me from my wickedness.
PSA 18:24 And the Lord shall yield to me by my rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and by the cleanness of mine hands in the sight of his eyes.
PSA 18:25 With the holy, thou shalt be holy; and with an innocent man, thou shalt be innocent.
PSA 18:26 And with a chosen man, thou shalt be chosen; and with a wayward man, thou shalt be wayward.
PSA 18:27 For thou shalt make safe a meek people; and thou shalt make meek the eyes of proud men.
PSA 18:28 For thou, Lord, lightenest my lantern; my God, lighten thou my darknesses.
PSA 18:29 For by thee I shall be delivered from temptation; and in my God I shall go over the wall.
PSA 18:30 My God, his way is undefouled; the speeches of the Lord be examined by fire; he is [[the]] defender of all men hoping in him.
PSA 18:31 For why, who is God, except the Lord? either who is God, except our God?
PSA 18:32 God that hath girded me with virtue; and hath set my way unwem-med.
PSA 18:33 Which made perfect my feet as the feet of harts; and ordaining me on high things.
PSA 18:34 Which teacheth mine hands to battle; and thou hast set mine arms as a brazen bow.
PSA 18:35 And thou hast given to me the covering of thine health; and thy right hand hath up-taken me. And thy chastising amended me into the end; and that chastising of thee shall teach me.
PSA 18:36 Thou alargedest my paces under me; and my steps be not made un-steadfast.
PSA 18:37 I shall pursue mine enemies, and I shall take them; and I shall not turn till they fail.
PSA 18:38 I shall all-break them, and they shall not be able to stand; they shall fall under my feet.
PSA 18:39 And thou hast girded me with virtue to battle; and thou hast overturned under me men rising against me.
PSA 18:40 And thou hast given mine enemies aback [[or back]] to me; and thou hast destroyed them that hated me.
PSA 18:41 They cried, and none there was that made them safe; they cried to the Lord, and he heard not them.
PSA 18:42 And I shall all-break them, as dust before the face of the wind; I shall do them away, as the clay of streets.
PSA 18:43 Thou shalt deliver me from [[the]] against-sayings of the people; thou shalt set me into the head of folks. The people, which I knew not, hath served me;
PSA 18:44 in the hearing of ear it obeyed to me. Alien sons lied down to me,
PSA 18:45 alien sons waxed eld; and went crooked from thy paths.
PSA 18:46 The Lord liveth, and my God be blessed; and the God of mine health be enhanced.
PSA 18:47 God, that givest vengeances to me, and makest subject peoples under me;
PSA 18:48 thou art my deliverer from my wrathful enemies. And thou shalt enhance me from them, that rise against me; thou shalt deliver me from a wicked man.
PSA 18:49 Therefore, Lord, I shall acknowl-edge to thee among nations; and I shall say psalm to thy name.
PSA 18:50 Magnifying the healths of his king; and doing mercy to his christ David, and to his seed till into the world.
PSA 19:1 To victory, the psalm of David. Heavens tell out the glory of God; and the firmament telleth the works of his hands.
PSA 19:2 The day telleth out to the day a word; and the night showeth know-ing to the night.
PSA 19:3 No languages be, neither words; of which the voices of them be not heard.
PSA 19:4 The sound of them went out into all earth; and the words of them into the ends of the world. In the sun he hath set his tabernacle;
PSA 19:5 and he as a spouse coming forth of his chamber. He fully joyed, as a giant, to run his way;
PSA 19:6 his going out was from [[the]] high-est heaven. And his going again was to the highest thereof; and none there is that hideth himself from his heat.
PSA 19:7 The law of the Lord is without wem, and converteth souls; the wit-nessing of the Lord is faithful, and giveth wisdom to little, either meek, children.
PSA 19:8 The rightfulnesses of the Lord be rightful, gladdening hearts; the com-mandment of the Lord is clear, en-lightening eyes.
PSA 19:9 The holy dread of the Lord dwelleth into the world of world; the dooms of the Lord be true, justified into themselves.
PSA 19:10 Desirable more than gold, and a stone much precious; and sweeter than honey and honeycomb.
PSA 19:11 Forsooth thy servant keepeth those [[or them]]; much yielding is in those dooms to be kept.
PSA 19:12 Who understandeth trespasses? make thou me clean from my privy sins;
PSA 19:13 and of alien sins spare thy servant. If those [[or they]] have not lordship of me, then I shall be undefouled of alien sins, or without wem; and I shall be cleansed of the most sin.
PSA 19:14 And the speeches of my mouth shall be such, that they please; and the thinking of mine heart is ever[[more]] in thy sight. Lord, mine helper; and mine again-buyer.
PSA 20:1 To victory, the psalm of David. The Lord hear thee in the day of tribulation; the name of God of Jacob defend thee.
PSA 20:2 Send he help to thee from the holy place; and from Zion defend he thee.
PSA 20:3 Be he mindful of all thy sacrifice; and thy burnt sacrifice be made fat.
PSA 20:4 Give he to thee after thine heart; and confirm he all thy counsel.
PSA 20:5 We shall be glad in thine health; and we shall be magnified in the name of our God. The Lord [[ful]] fill all thine askings;
PSA 20:6 now I have known, that the Lord hath made safe his christ. He shall hear him from his holy heaven; the health of his right hand is in powers.
PSA 20:7 These, that is, adversaries, trust in chariots, and these in horses; but we shall inwardly call in the name of our Lord God.
PSA 20:8 They be bound, and felled down; but we have risen, and be raised.
PSA 20:9 Lord, make thou safe the king; and hear thou us in the day in which we inwardly call thee.
PSA 21:1 To victory, the psalm of David. Lord, the king shall be glad in thy virtue; and he shall full out have joy greatly on thine health.
PSA 21:2 Thou hast given to him the desire of his heart; and thou hast not defrauded him of the will of his lips.
PSA 21:3 For thou hast before-come him in the blessings of sweetness; thou hast set [[or puttest]] on his head a crown of precious stone.
PSA 21:4 He asked of thee life, and thou gavest it to him; the length of days into the world, and into the world of world.
PSA 21:5 His glory is great in thine health; thou shalt put glory, and great fairness, on him.
PSA 21:6 For thou shalt give him into bless-ing into the world of world; thou shalt make him glad in joy with thy cheer.
PSA 21:7 For the king hopeth in the Lord; and in the mercy of the Highest he shall not be moved.
PSA 21:8 Thine hand be found to all thine enemies; thy right hand find all them that hate thee.
PSA 21:9 Thou shalt put them as a furnace of fire in the time of thy cheer; the Lord shall trouble them in his ire, and fire shall devour them.
PSA 21:10 Thou shalt lose the fruit of them from the earth; and the seed of them from the sons of men.
PSA 21:11 For they bowed evil against thee; they thought counsels, which they might not stablish.
PSA 21:12 For thou shalt put them aback; in thy remnants thou shalt make ready the cheer of them.
PSA 21:13 Lord, be thou enhanced in thy virtue; we shall sing, and say openly thy virtues.
PSA 22:1 To the overcomer, for the morrow-tide hind, the psalm of David. God, my God, behold thou on me, why hast thou forsaken me? the words of my trespasses be far from mine health.
PSA 22:2 My God, I shall cry by day, and thou shalt not hear; and by night, and not to unwisdom to me.
PSA 22:3 Forsooth thou, the praising of Israel, dwellest in holiness;
PSA 22:4 our fathers hoped in thee; they hoped, and thou deliveredest them.
PSA 22:5 They cried to thee, and they were made safe; they hoped in thee, and they were not shamed.
PSA 22:6 But I am a worm, and not a man; the shame of men, and the out-casting of the people.
PSA 22:7 All men seeing me scorned me; they spake with lips, and wagged the head, and said,
PSA 22:8 He hoped in the Lord, deliver he him; make he him safe, for he will or delights in him.
PSA 22:9 For thou it art that drewest me out of the womb, that art mine hope from the teats of my mother;
PSA 22:10 into thee I am cast forth from the womb. From the womb of my mother thou art my God;
PSA 22:11 depart thou not from me. For tribulation is next; for none there is that helpeth.
PSA 22:12 Many calves encompassed me; fat bulls besieged me.
PSA 22:13 They opened their mouth on me; as a lion ravishing and roaring.
PSA 22:14 I am poured out as water; and all my bones be scattered. Mine heart is made, as wax floating abroad [[or melting]]; in the midst of my womb.
PSA 22:15 My virtue dried as a tilestone, and my tongue cleaved to my cheeks; and thou hast brought forth me into the dust of death.
PSA 22:16 For many dogs encompassed me; the council of wicked men besieged me. They delved mine hands and my feet;
PSA 22:17 they numbered all my bones. Soothly they looked, and beheld me;
PSA 22:18 they parted my clothes to them-selves, and they sent lot on my cloth.
PSA 22:19 But thou, Lord, delay not thine help from me; behold thou to my defence.
PSA 22:20 God, deliver thou my life from sword; and deliver thou mine one alone from the hand, or power, of the dog.
PSA 22:21 Make thou me safe from the mouth of a lion; and my meekness from the horns of unicorns.
PSA 22:22 I shall tell thy name to my brethren; I shall praise thee in the midst of the church.
PSA 22:23 Ye that dread the Lord, praise him; all the seed of Jacob, glorify him. All the seed of Israel, dread him;
PSA 22:24 for he forsook not, neither despised the prayer of a poor man. Neither he turned away his face from me; and when I cried to him, he heard me.
PSA 22:25 My praising is with thee in a great church; I shall yield my vows in the sight of men dreading him.
PSA 22:26 Poor men shall eat, and shall be [[ful]] filled, and they shall praise the Lord, that seek him; the hearts of them shall live into the world of world.
PSA 22:27 All the ends of earth shall bethink; and shall be converted to the Lord. And all the meines of heathen men, shall worship in his sight.
PSA 22:28 For the realm is the Lord’s; and he shall be Lord of heathen men.
PSA 22:29 All the fat men of earth ate and worshipped; all men, that go down into earth, shall fall down in his sight. And my soul shall live to him;
PSA 22:30 and my seed shall serve him. A generation to coming shall be told to the Lord;
PSA 22:31 and heavens shall tell his rightful-ness [[or rightwiseness]] to the people that shall be born, whom the Lord made.
PSA 23:1 The psalm of David. The Lord governeth me, and nothing shall fail to me;
PSA 23:2 in the place of pasture there he hath set me. He nourished me on the water of refreshing;
PSA 23:3 he converted my soul. He led me forth on the paths of rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; for his name.
PSA 23:4 For why though I shall go in the midst of shadow of death; I shall not dread evils, for thou art with me. Thy rod and thy staff; those have comforted me.
PSA 23:5 Thou hast made ready a board in my sight; against them that trouble me. Thou hast made fat mine head with oil; and my cup, that filleth greatly, is full clear.
PSA 23:6 And thy mercy shall follow me; in all the days of my life. And that I dwell in the house of the Lord; into the length of days.
PSA 24:1 The psalm of David. The earth and the fullness thereof is the Lord’s; the world, and all that dwell therein.
PSA 24:2 For he founded it on the seas; and made it ready on floods.
PSA 24:3 Who shall ascend or go up into the hill of the Lord; either who shall stand in the holy place of him?
PSA 24:4 The innocent in hands, that is, in works, and in clean heart; which took not his soul in vain, neither swore in guile to his neighbour.
PSA 24:5 He shall take blessing of the Lord; and mercy of God his health.
PSA 24:6 This is the generation of men seeking him; of men seeking the face of God of Jacob.
PSA 24:7 Ye princes, take up your gates, and ye everlasting gates, be ye raised; and the king of glory shall enter.
PSA 24:8 Who is this king of glory? the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle.
PSA 24:9 Ye princes, take up your gates, and ye everlasting gates, be ye raised; and the king of glory shall enter.
PSA 24:10 Who is this king of glory? the Lord of virtuesor the Lord of hosts, he is the king of glory.
PSA 25:1 The song of David. Lord, to thee I have raised my soul;
PSA 25:2 my God, I trust in thee, be I not ashamed. Neither mine enemies scorn me;
PSA 25:3 for all men that suffer thee shall not be shamed. All men doing wicked things superfluously; be they shamed.
PSA 25:4 Lord, show thou thy ways to me; and teach thou me thy paths.
PSA 25:5 Dress thou me in thy truth, and teach thou me, for thou art God, my saviour; and I suffered thee all day.
PSA 25:6 Lord, have thou mind of thy merciful doings; and of thy mercies that be from the world.
PSA 25:7 Have thou not mind on the tres-passes of my youth; and on mine unknowings. Thou, Lord, have mind on me by thy mercy; for thy goodness.
PSA 25:8 The Lord is sweet and rightful; for this cause he shall give a law to men trespassing in the way.
PSA 25:9 He shall dress meek men in doom; he shall teach mild men his ways.
PSA 25:10 All the ways of the Lord be mercy and truth; to men seeking his testament, and his witnessings.
PSA 25:11 Lord, for thy name, thou shalt do mercy to my sin; for it is much.
PSA 25:12 Who is a man, that dreadeth the Lord? he ordaineth to him a law in the way which he should choose.
PSA 25:13 His soul shall dwell in goods; and his seed shall inherit the land.
PSA 25:14 The Lord is a firmness to men dreading him; and his testament is, that it be showed to them.
PSA 25:15 Mine eyes be ever[[more]] toward the Lord; for he shall pull away [[or pull up]] my feet from the snare.
PSA 25:16 Behold thou to me, and have thou mercy on me; for I am one alone and poor.
PSA 25:17 The tribulations of mine heart be multiplied; deliver thou me of my needs.
PSA 25:18 See thou my meekness and my travail; and forgive thou all my tres-passes.
PSA 25:19 Behold thou mine enemies, for they be multiplied; and they hate me by wicked hatred.
PSA 25:20 Keep thou my soul, and deliver me; be I not ashamed, for I hoped in thee.
PSA 25:21 Innocent men and rightful cleaved to me; for I suffered thee.
PSA 25:22 God, deliver thou Israel; from all his tribulations.
PSA 26:1 [[The psalm of David.]] Lord, deem thou me, for I entered in mine inno-cence; and I hoping in the Lord, shall not be made unsteadfast.
PSA 26:2 Lord, prove thou me, and assay me; burn thou my reins, and mine heart.
PSA 26:3 For why thy mercy is before mine eyes; and I pleased in thy truth.
PSA 26:4 I sat not with the counsel of vanity; and I shall not enter with men doing wicked things.
PSA 26:5 I hated the church of evil men; and I shall not sit with wicked men.
PSA 26:6 I shall wash mine hands among innocents; and, Lord, I shall compass thine altar.
PSA 26:7 That I hear the voice of praising; and that I tell out all thy marvels.
PSA 26:8 Lord, I have loved the fairness of thine house; and the place of the dwelling of thy glory.
PSA 26:9 God, lose thou not my soul with unfaithful men; and my life with men of bloods.
PSA 26:10 In whose hands wickednesses be; the right hand of them is full-filled with gifts.
PSA 26:11 But I entered in mine innocence; again-buy thou me, and have mercy on me.
PSA 26:12 My foot stood in rightfulness; Lord, I shall bless thee in churches.
PSA 27:1 The holy prayer of David. The Lord is my lightening, and mine health; whom shall I dread? The Lord is defender of my life; for whom shall I tremble [[or quake]]?
PSA 27:2 The while noisome men nigh on me; for to eat my fleshes. Mine enemies, that troubled me; they were made sick and felled [[or fell]] down.
PSA 27:3 Though castles [[or tents]] stand together against me; mine heart shall not dread. Though battle riseth against me; in this thing I shall have hope.
PSA 27:4 I asked of the Lord one thing; I shall seek this thing; that I dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. That I see the will of the Lord; and that I visit his temple.
PSA 27:5 For he hid me in his tabernacle in the day of evils; he defended me in the hid place of his tabernacle. He enhanced me in a stone;
PSA 27:6 and now he enhanced mine head over mine enemies. I compassed, and offered in his tabernacle a sacrifice of crying [[out]]; I shall sing, and I shall say psalm to the Lord.
PSA 27:7 Lord, hear thou my voice, by which I cried to thee; have thou mercy on me, and hear me.
PSA 27:8 Mine heart said to thee, My face sought thee; Lord, I shall seek again thy face.
PSA 27:9 Turn thou not away thy face from me; bow thou not away in wrath from thy servant. Lord, be thou mine helper, forsake thou not me; and, God, mine health, despise thou not me.
PSA 27:10 For my father and my mother have forsaken me; but the Lord hath taken me up.
PSA 27:11 Lord, set thou a law to me in thy way; and dress thou me in a rightful [[or right]] path, for mine enemies.
PSA 27:12 Betake thou not me into the souls of them, that trouble me; for wicked witnesses have risen against me, and wickedness lied to itself.
PSA 27:13 I believe to see the goods of the Lord; in the land of living men.
PSA 27:14 Abide thou the Lord, do thou manly; and thine heart be comforted, and suffer thou for the Lord.
PSA 28:1 To David. [[The psalm to this David.]] Lord, I shall cry to thee; my God, be thou not still from me, be thou not still any time from me; and I shall be made like to them, that go down into the pit.
PSA 28:2 Lord, hear thou the voice of my beseeching, while I pray to thee; while I raise mine hands toward thine holy temple.
PSA 28:3 Betake thou not me together with sinners; and lose thou not me with them that work wickedness. Which speak peace to their neighbours; but evils be in their hearts.
PSA 28:4 Give thou to them after the works of them; and after the wickedness of their findings. Give thou to them after the works of their hands; yield thou their yielding to them.
PSA 28:5 For they understood not the works of the Lord, and by the works of his hands thou shalt destroy them; and thou shalt not build them.
PSA 28:6 Blessed be the Lord; for he heard the voice of my beseeching.
PSA 28:7 The Lord is mine helper and my defender; and mine heart hoped in him, and I am helped. And my flesh flowered again; and of my will I shall acknowledge to him.
PSA 28:8 The Lord is the strength of his people; and he is the defender of the savings of his christ.
PSA 28:9 Lord, make thou safe thy people, and bless thou thine heritage; and rule thou them, and enhance thou them till into without end.
PSA 29:1 The psalm of David. Ye sons of God, bring to the Lord; bring ye to the Lord, the sons of rams. Bring ye to the Lord glory and honour;
PSA 29:2 bring ye to the Lord glory to his name; praise ye the Lord in his holy large place.
PSA 29:3 The voice of the Lord on waters, God of majesty thundered; the Lord on many waters.
PSA 29:4 The voice of the Lord in virtue; the voice of the Lord in great doing.
PSA 29:5 The voice of the Lord breaking cedars; and the Lord shall break the cedars of Lebanon.
PSA 29:6 And he shall all-break them to dust, as a calf of the Lebanon; and the darling was as the son of an unicorn.
PSA 29:7 The voice of the Lord parting the flames of fire;
PSA 29:8 the voice of the Lord shaking desert; and the Lord shall stir altogether the desert of Kadesh.
PSA 29:9 The voice of the Lord making ready harts to calve, and he shall show thick things; and in his temple all men shall say glory.
PSA 29:10 The Lord maketh to inhabit the great flood; and the Lord shall sit King without end.
PSA 29:11 The Lord shall give virtue to his people; the Lord shall bless his people in peace.
PSA 30:1 The psalm of[[the]]song, for the hallowing of the house of David. Lord, I shall enhance thee, for thou hast up-taken me; and thou delighted-est not mine enemies on me.
PSA 30:2 My Lord God, I cried to thee; and thou madest me whole.
PSA 30:3 Lord, thou leddest out my soul from hell; thou savedest me from them that go down into the pit.
PSA 30:4 Ye saints of the Lord, sing to the Lord; and acknowledge ye to the mind of his holiness.
PSA 30:5 For ire is in his indignation; and life is in his will. Weeping shall dwell at eventide; and gladness at the morrowtide.
PSA 30:6 Forsooth I said in my plenty; I shall not be moved without end.
PSA 30:7 Lord, in thy will; thou hast given virtue to my fairness. Thou turnedest away thy face from me; and I am made troubled.
PSA 30:8 Lord, I shall cry to thee; and I shall pray to my God.
PSA 30:9 What profit is in my blood; while I go down into corruption? Whether dust shall acknowledge to thee; either it shall tell of thy truth?
PSA 30:10 The Lord heard, and had mercy on me; the Lord is made mine helper.
PSA 30:11 Thou hast turned my wailing into joy to me; thou hast rent my sack-cloth, and hast encompassed me with gladness.
PSA 30:12 That my glory sing to thee, and I be not compunct; my Lord God, I shall acknowledge to thee without end.
PSA 31:1 To victory, the psalm of David. Lord, I have hoped in thee, be I not shamed without end; deliver thou me in thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]].
PSA 31:2 Bow down thine ear to me; haste thou to deliver me. Be thou to me into God a defender, and into an house of refuge; that thou make me safe.
PSA 31:3 For thou art my strength and my refuge; and for thy name, thou shalt lead me forth, and shalt nourish me.
PSA 31:4 Thou shalt lead me out of the snare, which they hid to me; for thou art my defender.
PSA 31:5 I betake my spirit into thine hands; Lord God of truth, thou hast again-bought me.
PSA 31:6 Thou hatest them that keep vanities superfluously. Forsooth I hoped in the Lord;
PSA 31:7 I shall have fully joy, and shall be glad in thy mercy. For thou beheldest my meekness; thou savedest my life from needs.
PSA 31:8 And thou enclosedest not me altogether within the hands of the enemy; thou hast set my feet in a large place.
PSA 31:9 Lord, have thou mercy on me, for I am troubled; mine eye is troubled in ire, my soul and my womb also.
PSA 31:10 For why my life failed in sorrow; and my years in wailings. My virtue is made feeble in poverty; and my bones be troubled.
PSA 31:11 Over all mine enemies I am made a shame, [[and]] greatly to my neighbours; and dread to my known. They that saw me withoutforth, fled from me;
PSA 31:12 I am given to forgetting, as a dead man from the heart. I am made as a forlorn vessel;
PSA 31:13 for I heard despising of many men dwelling in compass. In that thing while they came together against me; they counselled to take my life.
PSA 31:14 But, Lord, I hoped in thee; I said, Thou art my God;
PSA 31:15 my times be in thine hands. Deliver thou me from the hands of mine enemies; and from them that pursue me.
PSA 31:16 Make thou clear thy face on thy servant; Lord, make thou me safe in thy mercy;
PSA 31:17 be I not shamed, for I inwardly called thee. Unpious men be ashamed, and be they led forth into hell;
PSA 31:18 guileful lips be made dumb. That speak wickedness against a just [[or rightwise]] man; in pride, and in mis-using or in abusing.
PSA 31:19 Lord, the multitude of thy sweet-ness is full great; which thou hast hid to men dreading thee. Thou hast made a perfect thing to them that hope in thee; in the sight of the sons of men.
PSA 31:20 Thou shalt hide them in the private of thy face; from [[the]] troubling of men. Thou shalt defend them in thy tabernacle; from [[the]] against-saying of tongues.
PSA 31:21 Blessed be the Lord; for he hath made wonderful his mercy to me in a strengthened city.
PSA 31:22 Forsooth I said in the out-passing of my soul; I am cast out from the face of thine eyes. Therefore thou heardest the voice of my prayer; while I cried to thee.
PSA 31:23 All ye holy men of the Lord, love him; for the Lord shall seek truth, and he shall yield plenteously to them that do pride.
PSA 31:24 All ye that hope in the Lord, do ye manly; and your heart be comforted.
PSA 32:1 Learning to David. [[The under-standing of David.]] Blessed be they, whose wickedness be forgiven; and whose sins be covered.
PSA 32:2 Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord areckoned not sin; neither guile is in his spirit.
PSA 32:3 For I was still, my bones waxed eld; while I cried all day.
PSA 32:4 For by day and night thine hand was made grievous on me; I am turned in my wretchedness, while the thorn is set in.
PSA 32:5 I made my sin known to thee; and I hid not my unrightfulness. I said, I shall acknowledge against me mine unrightfulness to the Lord; and thou hast forgiven the wickedness of my sin.
PSA 32:6 For this thing each holy man shall pray to thee; in covenable time. Nevertheless in the great flood of many waters; they shall not nigh to thee.
PSA 32:7 Thou art my refuge from tribulation, that encompassed me; thou, my fully joying [[or full out joy]], deliver me from them that encompass me.
PSA 32:8 I shall give understanding to thee, and I shall teach thee; in this way in which thou shalt go, I shall make steadfast mine eyes on thee.
PSA 32:9 Do not ye be made as an horse and mule; to which is none under-standing. Lord, constrain thou the cheeks of them with a barnacle and bridle; that they nigh not to thee.
PSA 32:10 Many beatings be of the sinner; but mercy shall encompass him that hopeth in the Lord.
PSA 32:11 Ye just [[or rightwise]] men, be glad, and make fully joy in the Lord; and all ye rightful of heart, have glory.
PSA 33:1 Ye just [[or rightwise]] men, have fully joy [[or full out joyeth]] in the Lord; praising altogether becometh rightful [[or right]] men.
PSA 33:2 Acknowledge ye to the Lord in an harp; sing ye to him in a psaltery of ten strings.
PSA 33:3 Sing ye to him a new song; say ye well psalm to him in crying [[out]].
PSA 33:4 For the word of the Lord is rightful [[or right]]; and all his works be in faithfulness.
PSA 33:5 He loveth mercy and doom; the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord.
PSA 33:6 Heavens be made steadfast by the word of the Lord; and all the virtue of those [[or them]] by the spirit of his mouth.
PSA 33:7 And he gathered together the waters of the sea as in a bouget or a bottle; and he setteth deep waters in treasures.
PSA 33:8 All earth dread the Lord; soothly all men inhabiting the world be moved of him.
PSA 33:9 For he said, and things were made; he commanded, and things were made of nought.
PSA 33:10 The Lord destroyeth the counsels of folks, forsooth he reproveth the thoughts of peoples; and he reproveth the counsels of princes.
PSA 33:11 But the counsel of the Lord dwelleth without end; the thoughts of his heart dwell in generation and into generation.
PSA 33:12 Blessed is the folk, whose Lord is his God; the people which he chose into heritage to himself.
PSA 33:13 The Lord beheld from heaven; he saw all the sons of men.
PSA 33:14 From his dwelling place made ready before; he beheld on all men, that inhabit the earth.
PSA 33:15 Which made singularly, either each by himself, the souls of them; which understandeth all the works of them.
PSA 33:16 A king is not saved by much virtue, that is, strength; and a giant shall not be saved in the muchliness of his virtue.
PSA 33:17 An horse is false to health; for-sooth he shall not be saved in the abundance, either plenty, of his virtue.
PSA 33:18 Lo! the eyes of the Lord be on men dreading him; and in them that hope in his mercy.
PSA 33:19 That he deliver their souls from death; and feed them in hunger.
PSA 33:20 Our soul suffereth the Lord, that is, abideth patiently his will; for he is our helper and defender.
PSA 33:21 For our heart shall be glad in him; and we shall have hope in his holy name.
PSA 33:22 Lord, thy mercy be made on us; as we hoped in thee.
PSA 34:1 To David, when he changed his mouth, or his word, before Abimelech, and he drove out David, and he went forth. [[The psalm of David, when he changed his cheer before Abimelech, and he let him go, and he went away.]] I shall bless the Lord in all time; ever[[more]] his praising be in my mouth.
PSA 34:2 My soul shall be praised in the Lord; mild men hear, and be glad.
PSA 34:3 Magnify ye the Lord with me; and enhance we his name into itself.
PSA 34:4 I sought the Lord, and he heard me; and he delivered me from all my tribulations.
PSA 34:5 Nigh ye to him, and be ye lighten-ed; and your faces shall not be shamed.
PSA 34:6 This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him from all his tribulations.
PSA 34:7 The angel of the Lord sendeth in the compass of men dreading him; and he shall deliver them.
PSA 34:8 Taste ye, and see, for the Lord is sweet; blessed is the man, that hopeth in him.
PSA 34:9 All ye holy men of the Lord, dread ye him; for no neediness is to men dreading him.
PSA 34:10 Rich men were needy, and were hungry; but men that seek the Lord shall not fail of all good.
PSA 34:11 Come, ye sons, hear ye me; I shall teach you the dread of the Lord.
PSA 34:12 Who is the man, that willeth or desireth life; that loveth to see good days?
PSA 34:13 Forbid thy tongue from evil; and thy lips speak not guile.
PSA 34:14 Turn thou away from evil, and do good; seek thou peace, and perfectly pursue thou it.
PSA 34:15 The eyes of the Lord be on just [[or rightwise]] men; and his ears be to their prayers.
PSA 34:16 But the cheer of the Lord is on men doing evils; that he lose the mind the memory of them from [[the]] earth.
PSA 34:17 Just [[or rightwise]] men cried, and the Lord heard them; and delivered them from all their tribulations.
PSA 34:18 The Lord is nigh [[to]] them that be of troubled heart; and he shall save meek men in spirit.
PSA 34:19 Many tribulations be of just [[or rightwise]] men; and the Lord shall deliver them from all these [[or them]].
PSA 34:20 The Lord keepeth all the bones of them; one of those [[or them]] shall not be broken.
PSA 34:21 The death of sinners is worst; and they that hate a just [[or rightwise]] man shall trespass.
PSA 34:22 The Lord shall again-buy the souls of his servants; and all, that hope in him, shall not trespass.
PSA 35:1 To David. [[The psalm of David.]] Lord, deem thou them, that annoy me; overcome thou them, that fight against me.
PSA 35:2 Take thou armours and shield; and rise up into help to me.
PSA 35:3 Hold out the sword, and close altogether the way against them that pursue me; say thou to my soul, I am thine health.
PSA 35:4 They that seek my life; be shamed, and ashamed. They that think evils to me; be turned away backward, and be they shamed.
PSA 35:5 Be they made as dust before the face of the wind; and the angel of the Lord make them strait.
PSA 35:6 Their way be made darkness, and sliderness; and the angel of the Lord pursue them.
PSA 35:7 For without cause they hid to me the death of their snare; in vain they despised my soul.
PSA 35:8 The snare which he knoweth not come to him, and the taking which he hid take him; and fall he into the snare in that thing.
PSA 35:9 But my soul shall fully have joy in the Lord; and shall delight on his health.
PSA 35:10 All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like thee? Thou deliverest a poor man from the hand of his stronger; a needy man and poor from them that diversely ravish him.
PSA 35:11 Wicked witnesses rising asked me things, which I knew not.
PSA 35:12 They yielded to me evils for goods; barrenness to my soul.
PSA 35:13 But when they were dis-easeful to me; I was clothed in an hair-shirt. I meeked my soul in fasting; and my prayer shall be turned into my bosom.
PSA 35:14 I pleased so as our neighbour, as our brother; I was made meek, so as mourning and sorrowful.
PSA 35:15 And they were glad, and came together against me; torments were gathered on me, and I knew it not. They were scattered, and not compunct;
PSA 35:16 they tempted me, they scorned me with mocking, they gnashed on me with their teeth.
PSA 35:17 Lord, when thou shalt behold, restore thou my soul from the wicked-ness of them; mine one alone from lions.
PSA 35:18 I shall acknowledge to thee in a great church; I shall praise thee in a firm people.
PSA 35:19 They that be adversaries wickedly to me, have not joy on me; that hate me without cause, and beckon with eyes.
PSA 35:20 For soothly they spake not peace-ably to me; and they speaking in wrath-fulness of [[the]] earth, thought guiles.
PSA 35:21 And they made large their mouth on me; they said, Well, well! our eyes have seen.
PSA 35:22 Lord, thou hast seen, be thou not still; Lord, depart thou not from me.
PSA 35:23 Rise up, and give attention to my doom; my God and my Lord, behold into my cause.
PSA 35:24 My Lord God, deem thou me by thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and have they not joy on me.
PSA 35:25 Say they not in their hearts, Well, well, to our soul; neither say they, We shall devour him.
PSA 35:26 Shame they, and dread they together; that joy for mine evils. Be they clothed with shame and dread; that speak evil things on me.
PSA 35:27 Have they full joy, and be they glad, that will or desire my rightful-ness [[or rightwiseness]]; and say they ever[[more]], The Lord be magnified, which desire the peace of his servant.
PSA 35:28 And my tongue shall bethink thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; all day thy praising.
PSA 36:1 To victory, to David[[or the psalm of David]], the servant of the Lord. The unjust man said, that he trespass in himself; the dread of God is not before his eyes.
PSA 36:2 For he did guilefully in the sight of God; that his wickedness be found to be hatred.
PSA 36:3 The words of his mouth be wickedness and guile; he would not understand to do well.
PSA 36:4 He thought wickedness in his bed; he stood nigh all ways not good; forsooth he hated not malice.
PSA 36:5 Lord, thy mercy is in heaven; and thy truth is unto [[the]] clouds.
PSA 36:6 Thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]is as the hills of God; thy dooms be as much depth of waters. Lord, thou shalt save men and beasts;
PSA 36:7 as thou, God, hast multiplied thy mercy. But the sons of men shall hope in the covering of thy wings.
PSA 36:8 They shall be filled greatly of the plenty of thine house; and thou shalt give drink to them of the stiff stream of thy liking [[or thy delight]].
PSA 36:9 For the well of life is with thee; and in thy light we shall see light.
PSA 36:10 Lord, set forth thy mercy to them that know thee; and thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] to them that be of rightful [[or right]] heart.
PSA 36:11 The foot of pride come not to me; and the hand of the sinner move me not.
PSA 36:12 There they have fallen down, that work wickedness; they be cast out, and might not stand.
PSA 37:1 To David. [[The psalm of David.]] Do not thou pursue [[or follow]] wicked men; neither love thou men doing wickedness.
PSA 37:2 For they shall wax dry swiftly as hay; and they shall fall down soon as the worts of herbs.
PSA 37:3 Hope thou in the Lord, and do thou goodness; and inhabit thou the land, and thou shalt be fed with his riches.
PSA 37:4 Delight thou in the Lord; and he shall give to thee the askings of thine heart.
PSA 37:5 Show thy way to the Lord; and hope in him, and he shall do.
PSA 37:6 And he shall lead out thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] as light, and thy doom as midday;
PSA 37:7 be thou subject to the Lord, and pray thou him. Do not thou pursue [[or follow]] him, that hath prosperity in his way; nor a man doing unright-fulness.
PSA 37:8 Cease thou of ire, and forsake strong vengeance; do not thou pursue [[or follow]], that thou do wickedly.
PSA 37:9 For they, that do wickedly, shall be destroyed; but they that suffer the Lord, shall inherit the land.
PSA 37:10 And yet a little, and a sinner shall not be; and thou shalt seek his place, and thou shalt not find it.
PSA 37:11 But mild men shall inherit the land; and shall delight in the multitude of peace.
PSA 37:12 A sinner shall ambush the rightful [[or rightwise]] man; and he shall gnash with his teeth on him.
PSA 37:13 But the Lord shall scorn the sinner; for he beholdeth that his day cometh.
PSA 37:14 Sinners have drawn out sword; they bent their bow. To deceive a poor man and needy; to strangle rightful [[or right]] men of heart.
PSA 37:15 Their sword enter into the heart of themselves; and their bow be broken.
PSA 37:16 Better is a little thing to a just [[or rightwise]] man; than many riches of sinners.
PSA 37:17 For the arms of sinners shall be all-broken; but the Lord confirmeth just [[or rightwise]] men.
PSA 37:18 The Lord knoweth the days of [[the]] unwemmed; and their heritage shall be without end.
PSA 37:19 They shall not be shamed in the evil time, and they shall be [[ful]] filled in the days of hunger;
PSA 37:20 for sinners shall perish. Forsooth anon as the enemies of the Lord be honoured, and enhanced; they failing shall fail as smoke.
PSA 37:21 A sinner shall borrow, and shall not pay back; but a just [[or rightwise]] man hath mercy, and shall give.
PSA 37:22 For they that bless the Lord shall inherit the land; but they that curse him shall perish.
PSA 37:23 The goings of a man shall be dressed with the Lord; and he shall delight in his way.
PSA 37:24 When he falleth, he shall not be hurtled or hurled down; for the Lord undersetteth his hand.
PSA 37:25 I was younger, and soothly I waxed eld; and I saw not a just [[or rightwise]] man forsaken, neither his seed seeking bread.
PSA 37:26 All day he hath mercy, and lendeth; and his seed shall be in blessing.
PSA 37:27 Bow thou away from evil, and do good; and dwell thou into the world of world.
PSA 37:28 For the Lord loveth doom, and shall not forsake his saints; they shall be kept without end. Unjust men shall be punished; and the seed of wicked men shall perish.
PSA 37:29 But just [[or rightwise]] men shall inherit the land; and shall inhabit thereon into the world of world.
PSA 37:30 The mouth of a just [[or rightwise]] man shall bethink wisdom; and his tongue shall speak doom.
PSA 37:31 The law of his God is in his heart; and his steps shall not be deceived.
PSA 37:32 A sinner beholdeth a just [[or right-wise]] man; and seeketh to slay him.
PSA 37:33 But the Lord shall not forsake him in his hands; neither he shall condemn him, when it shall be deemed against him.
PSA 37:34 Abide thou the Lord, and keep thou his way, and he shall enhance thee, that by heritage thou take the land; when sinners shall perish, thou shalt see.
PSA 37:35 I saw the wicked man enhanced above; and raised up as the cedars of Lebanon.
PSA 37:36 And I passed by, and lo! he was not there; I sought him, and his place was not found.
PSA 37:37 Keep thou innocence, and see equity; for those [[or they]] be relics or remnants to a peaceable man.
PSA 37:38 Forsooth unjust men shall perish; the remnants or relics of wicked men shall perish altogether.
PSA 37:39 But the health of just [[or rightwise]] men is of the Lord; and he is their defender in the time of tribulation.
PSA 37:40 And the Lord shall help them, and shall make them free, and he shall deliver them from sinners; and he shall save them, for they hoped in him.
PSA 38:1 The psalm of David, to bethink on the sabbath. Lord, reprove thou not me in thy strong vengeance; neither chastise thou me in thine ire.
PSA 38:2 For thine arrows be fixed in me; and thou hast made steadfast thine hand on me.
PSA 38:3 None health is in my flesh from the face of thine ire; no peace is to my bones from the face of my sins.
PSA 38:4 For my wickednesses be gone over mine head; as an heavy burden, those [[or they]] be made heavy on me.
PSA 38:5 Mine healed wounds were rotten, and be broken; from the face of mine unwisdom.
PSA 38:6 I am made a wretch, and I am bowed down till into the end; all day I entered sorrowful.
PSA 38:7 For my loins be filled with scorn-ings; and health is not in my flesh.
PSA 38:8 I am tormented, and made low full greatly; I roared for the wailing of mine heart.
PSA 38:9 Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my wailing is not hid from thee.
PSA 38:10 Mine heart is troubled in me, my virtue forsook me; and the light of mine eyes, and it is not with me.
PSA 38:11 My friends and my neighbours nighed; and stood against me. And they that were beside me stood afar;
PSA 38:12 and they did violence, that sought my life. And they that sought evils to me, spake vanities; and thought guiles [[or treacheries]] all day.
PSA 38:13 But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and as a dumb man not opening his mouth.
PSA 38:14 And I am made as a man not hearing; and not having reprovings in his mouth.
PSA 38:15 For, Lord, I hoped in thee; my Lord God, thou shalt hear me.
PSA 38:16 For I said, Hear me, Lest any time mine enemies have joy on me; and the while my feet be moved/and while my feet were moved, they spake great things on me.
PSA 38:17 For I am ready to beatings; and my sorrow is ever[[more]] in my sight.
PSA 38:18 For I shall tell my wickedness; and I shall think for my sin.
PSA 38:19 But mine enemies live, and they be confirmed on me; and they be multiplied, that hate me wickedly.
PSA 38:20 They that yield evils for goods, backbited me; for I pursued [[or followed]] goodness.
PSA 38:21 My Lord God, forsake thou not me; go thou not away from me.
PSA 38:22 Lord God of mine health; behold thou into mine help.
PSA 39:1 For victory, to Jeduthun, the psalm of David. I said, I shall keep my ways; that I trespass not in my tongue. I setted [[or put]] keeping to my mouth; when a sinner stood against me.
PSA 39:2 I was dumb, and I was meeked full greatly, and was still, even from goods; and my sorrow was renewed.
PSA 39:3 Mine heart was hot within me; and fire shall burn out in my thinking. I spake in my tongue;
PSA 39:4 Lord, make thou mine end known to me. And the number of my days, what it is; that I know, what faileth to me.
PSA 39:5 Lo! thou hast set [[or put]] my days measurable; and my substance is as nought before thee. Nevertheless all vanity; each man living.
PSA 39:6 Nevertheless a man passeth in an image; but also he is troubled vainly. He treasureth; and he know not, to whom he shall gather those things.
PSA 39:7 And now which is mine abiding? whether not the Lord? and my substance is at thee.
PSA 39:8 Deliver thou me from all my wickednesses; thou hast given me as a shame to the unknowing.
PSA 39:9 I was dumb, and opened not my mouth; for thou hast made this happen,
PSA 39:10 remove thou thy wounds from me. From the strength of thine hand I failed in blamings;
PSA 39:11 for wickedness thou hast chastised [[a]] man. And thou madest his life to fail as a spider; nevertheless each man is troubled in vain.
PSA 39:12 Lord, hear thou my prayer, and my beseeching; perceive thou with ears my tears. Be thou not still, for I am a comeling with thee; and a pilgrim, as all my fathers.
PSA 39:13 Forgive thou to me, that I be refreshed, before that I go; and I shall no more be.
PSA 40:1 For victory, the psalm of David. I abiding abode the Lord; and he gave attention to me. And he heard my prayers;
PSA 40:2 and he led out me from the pit of wretchedness, and from the filth of dregs. And he ordained my feet on a stone; and he dressed my goings.
PSA 40:3 And he sent into my mouth a new song; a song to our God. Many men shall see, and dread; and shall hope in the Lord.
PSA 40:4 Blessed is the man, of whom the name of the Lord is his hope; and he beheld not into vanities, and into false vengeances.
PSA 40:5 My Lord God, thou hast made thy marvels many; and in thy thoughts none is, that is like thee toward us. I told and I spake; and they be multiplied above number.
PSA 40:6 Thou wouldest or desiredest not sacrifice and offering; but thou madest perfectly ears to me. Thou askedest not burnt sacrifice, and other sacrifice for sin;
PSA 40:7 then I said, Lo! I come. In the head of the book it is written of me,
PSA 40:8 that I should do thy will; my God, I would also to do it; and thy law in the midst of mine heart.
PSA 40:9 I told thy rightfulness [[or rightwise-ness]] in a great church; lo! I shall not refrain my lips, Lord, thou knewest.
PSA 40:10 I hid not thy rightfulness [[or right-wiseness]] in mine heart; I said thy truth and thine health. I hid not thy mercy, and thy truth, from a much council.
PSA 40:11 But thou, Lord, make not far thy merciful doings from me; thy mercy and truth ever[[more]] take me up.
PSA 40:12 For why evils, of which is no number, encompassed me; my wicked-nesses have taken me, and I might not, that I should see. Those [[or They]] be multiplied above the hairs of mine head; and mine heart forsook me.
PSA 40:13 Lord, please it to thee, that thou deliver me; Lord, behold thou to help me.
PSA 40:14 Be they shamed, and ashamed together; that seek my life, to take away it. Be they turned aback, and be they shamed or ashamed; that will or desire evils to me.
PSA 40:15 Bear they their confusion anon; that say to me, Well! well! in scorn.
PSA 40:16 All men that seek thee, be fully joyful [[or full out joy]], and be glad in thee; and say they, that love thine health, The Lord be magnified ever-[[more]].
PSA 40:17 Forsooth I am a beggar and poor; the Lord is busy of me. Thou art mine helper and my defender; my God, tarry thou not.
PSA 41:1 For victory, the song of David. Blessed is he that understandeth of the needy man and poor; the Lord shall deliver him in the evil day.
PSA 41:2 The Lord keep him, and quicken him, and make him blessful in the land; and betake not him into the will of his enemies.
PSA 41:3 The Lord shall bear help to him on the bed of his sorrow; thou hast oft turned all his bedstraw in his sickness.
PSA 41:4 I said, Lord, have thou mercy on me; heal thou my soul, for I have sinned against thee.
PSA 41:5 Mine enemies said evils to me; When shall he die, and his name shall perish?
PSA 41:6 And if he entered for to see me, he spake vain things; his heart gathered wickedness to himself. He went with-outforth; and spake to the same thing or the same end.
PSA 41:7 All mine enemies backbited privily against me; against me they thought evils to me.
PSA 41:8 They ordained an evil word against me; Whether he that sleepeth, shall not lie to, that he rise again?
PSA 41:9 For why the man of my peace, in whom I hoped, he that ate my loaves; made great deceit on me.
PSA 41:10 But thou, Lord, have mercy on me, and raise me up again; and I shall yield to them.
PSA 41:11 In this thing I knew, that thou wouldest or delightest in me; for mine enemy shall not have joy on me.
PSA 41:12 Forsooth thou hast taken me up for mine innocence; and hast confirmed me in thy sight without end.
PSA 41:13 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from the world, and into the world; be it done, be it done.
PSA 42:1 To victory, [[by the understanding]], to the sons of Korah. As an hart desireth to the wells of waters; so thou, God, my soul desireth to thee.
PSA 42:2 My soul thirsted to God, the quick well or well of life; when shall I come, and appear before the face of God?
PSA 42:3 My tears were loaves to me day and night; while it is said to me each day, Where is thy God?
PSA 42:4 I bethought of these things, and I poured out in me my soul; for I shall pass into the place of the wonderful tabernacle, till to the house of God. In the voice of full out joying, and ac-knowledging; is the sound of the eater.
PSA 42:5 My soul, why art thou sorry; and why troublest thou me? Hope thou in God, for yet I shall acknowledge to him; he is the health of my cheer, and my God.
PSA 42:6 My soul is troubled within myself; therefore, God, I shall be mindful of thee from the land of Jordan, and from the little hill of Hermonites.
PSA 42:7 Depth calleth depth; in the voice of thy windows. All thine high things, and thy waves; passed over me.
PSA 42:8 The Lord sent his mercy in the day; and his song in the night. With me is the prayer to God of my life;
PSA 42:9 I shall say to God, Thou art mine up-taker. Why forgettest thou me; and why go I sorrowful, while the enemy tormenteth me?
PSA 42:10 While my bones be broken altogether; mine enemies, that trouble me, despised me. While they say to me, by all days; Where is thy God?
PSA 42:11 My soul, why art thou sorry; and why troublest thou me? Hope thou in God, for yet I shall acknowledge to him; he is the health of my cheer, and my God.
PSA 43:1 God, deem thou me, and separate thou my cause from a folk not holy; deliver thou me from a wicked man, and guileful [[or treacherous]].
PSA 43:2 For thou art God, my strength; why hast thou put me aback, and why go I sorrowful, while the enemy tormenteth me?
PSA 43:3 Send out thy light, and thy truth; those led me forth, and brought me into thine holy hill, and into thy tabernacles.
PSA 43:4 And I shall enter to the altar of God; to God, that gladdeth my youth. God, my God, I shall acknowledge to thee in an harp;
PSA 43:5 my soul, why art thou sorry, and why troublest thou me? Hope thou in God, for yet I shall acknowledge to him; that is the health of my cheer, and my God.
PSA 44:1 To victory, learning to the sons of Korah. God, we heard with our ears; our fathers told to us. The work, which thou wroughtest in the days of them; and in the old days.
PSA 44:2 Thine hand lost heathen men, and thou plantedest them; thou tormentedest peoples, and castedest them out.
PSA 44:3 For the children of Israel wielded the land not by their sword; and the arm of them saved not them. But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the lightening of thy cheer; for thou were pleased in them.
PSA 44:4 Thou art thyself, my king, and my God; that sendest healths to Jacob.
PSA 44:5 By thee we shall winnow our enemies with [[the]] horn; and in thy name we shall despise them, that rise against us.
PSA 44:6 For I shall not hope in my bow; and my sword shall not save me.
PSA 44:7 For thou hast saved us from men tormenting us; and thou hast shamed men hating us.
PSA 44:8 We shall be pleased in God all day; and in thy name we shall acknowledge to thee into the world.
PSA 44:9 But now thou hast put us aback, and hast shamed us; and thou, Lord, shalt not go out in our virtues.
PSA 44:10 Thou hast turned us away behind after our enemies; and they, that hated us, ravished diversely to themselves.
PSA 44:11 Thou hast given us as sheep of meats; and among heathen men thou hast scattered us.
PSA 44:12 Thou hast sold thy people without price; and multitude there was not in the exchangings of them.
PSA 44:13 Thou hast set [[or put]] us as a shame to our neighbours; mocking and scorn to them that be in our compass.
PSA 44:14 Thou hast set [[or put]] us into like-ness to heathen men; and wagging of the head among peoples.
PSA 44:15 All day my shame is against me; and the shame of my face covered me.
PSA 44:16 From the voice of [[the]] despiser, and evil speaker; from the face of the enemy, and [[the]] pursuer.
PSA 44:17 All these things came on us, and we have not forgotten thee; and we did not wickedly in thy testament.
PSA 44:18 And our heart went not away behind; and thou hast not bowed away our paths from thy way.
PSA 44:19 For thou hast made us low in the place of torment; and the shadow of death covered us.
PSA 44:20 If we forgat the name of our God; and if we held forth our hands to an alien God.
PSA 44:21 Whether God shall not seek these things? for he knoweth the hid things of heart.
PSA 44:22 For why we be slain all day for thee; we be deemed as sheep of slaying.
PSA 44:23 Lord, rise up, why sleepest thou? rise up, and put not us away into the end.
PSA 44:24 Why turnest thou away thy face? thou forgettest our poverty, and our tribulation.
PSA 44:25 For our life is made low in dust; our womb is glued together in the earth.
PSA 44:26 Lord, rise up thou, and help us; and again-buy us for thy name.
PSA 45:1 To the overcomer, for the lilies, the most loved song of learning of the sons of Korah. Mine heart hath told out a good word; I say my works to the king. My tongue is the pen of a writer; writing swiftly.
PSA 45:2 Christ, thou art fairer in shape than the sons of men; grace is spread abroad in thy lips; therefore God blessed thee without end.
PSA 45:3 Be thou gird with thy sword; on thy hip most mightily. Behold thou in thy shapeliness and thy fairness;
PSA 45:4 come thou forth with prosperity, and reign thou. For truth, and mildness, and rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and thy right hand shall lead forth thee wonderfully.
PSA 45:5 Thy sharp arrows shall fall into the hearts of the enemies of the king; peoples shall be under thee.
PSA 45:6 God, thy seat is into the world of world; the rod of thy realm is a rod of right ruling, or of equity.
PSA 45:7 Thou lovedest rightfulness [[or right-wiseness]], and hatedest wickedness; therefore thou, God, thy God, anointed thee with the oil of gladness, more than thy fellows.
PSA 45:8 Myrrh, and gum, and cassia, of thy clothes, out of the ivory houses or the houses of ivory; of which the daughters of kings delighted thee.
PSA 45:9 A queen stood nigh on thy right side, in clothing overgilded; compassed with diversity.
PSA 45:10 Daughter, hear thou, and see, and bow down thine ear; and forget thy people, and the house of thy father.
PSA 45:11 And the king shall covet thy fair-ness; for he is thy Lord God, and they shall worship him.
PSA 45:12 And the daughters of Tyre in gifts; all the rich men of the people shall beseech thy cheer.
PSA 45:13 All the glory of that daughter of the king is within, adorned in golden hems;
PSA 45:14 she is clothed about with diversities. Virgins shall be brought to the king after her; her neighbouresses shall be brought to thee.
PSA 45:15 They shall be brought in gladness, and full out joying; they shall be brought into the temple of the king.
PSA 45:16 Sons be born to thee, for thy fathers; thou shalt ordain them princes on all earth.
PSA 45:17 Lord, they shall be mindful of thy name; in each generation, and into generation. Therefore peoples shall acknowledge to thee without end; and into the world of world.
PSA 46:1 To the overcomer, the song of the sons of Korah, for youths. Our God, thou art refuge, and virtue; helper in tribulations, that have found us greatly.
PSA 46:2 Therefore we shall not dread, while the earth shall be troubled; and the hills shall be borne over into the heart of the sea.
PSA 46:3 The waters of them sounded, and were troubled; hills were troubled altogether in the strength of him.
PSA 46:4 The fierceness of [[the]] flood maketh glad the city of God; the highest God hath hallowed his tabernacle.
PSA 46:5 God in the midst thereof shall not be moved; God shall help it early in the gray morrowtide.
PSA 46:6 Heathen men were troubled alto-gether, and realms were bowed down; God gave his voice, the earth was moved.
PSA 46:7 The Lord of virtues is with us; God of Jacob is our up-taker.
PSA 46:8 Come ye, and see the works of the Lord; which wonders he hath set on the earth.
PSA 46:9 He doing away battles till to the end of the land; shall all-bruise bow, and he shall break altogether armours [[or arms]], and he shall burn shields with fire.
PSA 46:10 Give ye attention, and see ye, that I am God; I shall be enhanced among heathen men; and I shall be enhanced in earth.
PSA 46:11 The Lord of virtues is with us; God of Jacob is our up-taker.
PSA 47:1 To victory, a psalm to the sons of Korah. All ye folks, make joy with hands; sing ye heartily to God in the voice of full out joying.
PSA 47:2 For the Lord is high and fearedful; a great king on all earth.
PSA 47:3 He made peoples subject to us; and heathen men under our feet.
PSA 47:4 He chose his heritage to us; the fairness of Jacob, whom he loved.
PSA 47:5 God ascended in hearty song; and the Lord in the voice of a trump.
PSA 47:6 Sing ye to our God, sing ye; sing ye to our king, sing ye.
PSA 47:7 For God is king of all earth; sing ye [[psalm]] wisely.
PSA 47:8 God shall reign on heathen men; God sitteth on his holy seat.
PSA 47:9 The princes of peoples be gath-ered together with God of Abraham; for the strong gods of earth be raised greatly.
PSA 48:1 The song of psalm, of the sons of Korah. The Lord is great, and worthy to be praised full much; in the city of our God, in the holy hill of him.
PSA 48:2 It is founded in the full out joying of all earth; the hill of Zion, the sides of the north, the city of the great king.
PSA 48:3 God shall be known in the houses thereof; when he shall take it.
PSA 48:4 For lo! the kings of earth were gathered together; they came into one place.
PSA 48:5 They seeing, so wondered; they were troubled, they were moved altogether,
PSA 48:6 trembling took them. There sorrows, as of a woman travailing of child;
PSA 48:7 in a great spirit thou shalt all-break the ships of Tarshish.
PSA 48:8 As we heard, so we saw, in the city of the Lord of virtues, in the city of our God; God hath founded that city without end.
PSA 48:9 God, we have received thy mercy; in the midst of thy temple.
PSA 48:10 After thy name, God, so thy praising is spread abroad into the ends of earth; thy right hand is full of rightwiseness.
PSA 48:11 The hill of Zion be glad, and the daughters of Judah be fully joyful [[or full out joy]]; for thy dooms, Lord.
PSA 48:12 Compass ye Zion, and embrace ye it; tell ye in the towers thereof.
PSA 48:13 Set ye your hearts in the virtue of him; and part ye the houses of him, that ye tell out in another generation.
PSA 48:14 For this is God, our God, into without end, and into the world of world; he shall govern us into worlds.
PSA 49:1 To victory, a psalm to the sons of Korah. All ye folks, hear these things; all ye that dwell in the world, perceive with ears.
PSA 49:2 All the sons of earth, and the sons of men; together the rich man, and the poor into one.
PSA 49:3 My mouth shall speak wisdom; and the thinking of mine heart shall speak prudence.
PSA 49:4 I shall bow down mine ear into a parable; I shall open my reason set forth in a psaltery.
PSA 49:5 Why shall I dread in the evil day? the wickedness of mine heel shall encompass me.
PSA 49:6 Which trust in their own virtue; and have glory in the multitude of their riches.
PSA 49:7 A brother again-buyeth not, shall a man again-buy? and he shall not give to God his pleasing.
PSA 49:8 And he shall not be able to give the price of ransom for his soul; and he shall travail into without end,
PSA 49:9 and he shall live yet into the end. He shall not see perishing,
PSA 49:10 when he shall see wise men dying; the unwise man and the fool shall perish together. And they shall leave their riches to aliens;
PSA 49:11 and the sepulchres of them be the houses of them without end. The tabernacles of them be in generation and in generation; they called their names in their lands.
PSA 49:12 A man/Man, when he was in honour, understood not; he is compar-isoned to unwise beasts, and is made like to those [[or them]].
PSA 49:13 This way of them is cause of stumbling to them; and afterward they shall please altogether in their mouth.
PSA 49:14 As sheep they be put in hell; death shall gnaw them. And just men shall be lords of them in the morrow-tide; and the help of them shall wax eld [[or old]] in hell, for or from the glory of them.
PSA 49:15 Nevertheless God shall again-buy my soul from the power of hell; when he shall take me.
PSA 49:16 Dread thou not, when a man is made rich; and when the glory of his house is multiplied.
PSA 49:17 For when he shall die, he shall not take all things with him; and his glory shall not go down with him.
PSA 49:18 For his soul shall be blessed in his life; he shall acknowledge to thee, when thou hast done well to him.
PSA 49:19 He shall enter till into the gener-ations of his fathers; and till into with-out end he shall not see light.
PSA 49:20 A man/Man, when he was in honour, understood not; he is com-parisoned to unwise beasts, and is made like to those [[or them]].
PSA 50:1 The psalm of Asaph. God, the Lord of gods or God of gods, spake; and called the earth, from the rising of the sun till to the going down.
PSA 50:2 The shape of his fairness from Zion, God shall come openly;
PSA 50:3 our God, and he shall not be still. Fire shall burn on high in his sight; and a strong tempest in his compass.
PSA 50:4 He called heaven above; and the earth, to witness him deem his people.
PSA 50:5 Gather ye to him his saints; that ordain his testament above sacrifices.
PSA 50:6 And heavens shall show his rightwiseness or tell his rightfulness; for God is the judge.
PSA 50:7 My people, hear thou, and I shall speak to Israel; and I shall witness to thee, I am God, thy God.
PSA 50:8 I shall not reprove thee in thy sacrifices; and thy burnt sacrifices be ever[[more]] before me.
PSA 50:9 I shall not take calves of thine house; neither goat bucks of thy flocks.
PSA 50:10 For all the wild beasts of woods be mine; work beasts, and oxes [[or oxen]] in hills.
PSA 50:11 I have known all the volatiles of the firmament; and the fairness of the field is with me.
PSA 50:12 If I shall be hungry, I shall not say to thee; for the world and the fullness thereof is mine.
PSA 50:13 Whether I shall eat the flesh of bulls? either shall I drink the blood of goat bucks?
PSA 50:14 Offer thou to God the sacrifice of praising; and yield thine avows [[or vows]] to the highest God.
PSA 50:15 And inwardly call thou me in the day of tribulation; and I shall deliver thee, and thou shalt honour me.
PSA 50:16 But God said to the sinner, Why tellest thou out my rightfulnesses; and takest my testament by thy mouth?
PSA 50:17 Soothly thou hatedest lore, or discipline; and hast cast away my words behind thee.
PSA 50:18 If thou sawest a thief, thou rannest with him; and thou settedest thy part with adulterers.
PSA 50:19 Thy mouth was plenteous of malice; and thy tongue meddled together guiles [[or treacheries]].
PSA 50:20 Thou sitting spakest against thy brother, and thou settedest slander against the son of thy mother;
PSA 50:21 thou didest these things, and I was still. Thou guessedest wickedly, that I shall be like thee; I shall reprove thee, and I shall set against thy face.
PSA 50:22 Ye that forget God, understand these things; lest sometime he ravish, and none be that shall deliver.
PSA 50:23 The sacrifice of praising shall honour me; and there is the way, wherein I shall show to him the health of God.
PSA 51:1 To victory, the psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet came to him, when he entered to Bathsheba. God, have thou mercy on me; by thy great mercy. And by the muchliness of thy merciful doings; do thou away my wickedness.
PSA 51:2 Moreover wash thou me from my wickedness; and cleanse thou me from my sin.
PSA 51:3 For I acknowledge my wickedness; and my sin is ever[[more]] against me.
PSA 51:4 I have sinned to thee alone, and I have done evil before thee; that thou be justified in thy words, and overcome when thou art deemed.
PSA 51:5 For lo! I was conceived in wicked-nesses; and my mother conceived me in sins.
PSA 51:6 For lo! thou lovedest truth; thou hast showed to me the uncertain things, and privy things of thy wisdom.
PSA 51:7 Lord, sprinkle thou me with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed; wash thou me, and I shall be made white more than snow.
PSA 51:8 Give thou joy, and gladness to mine hearing; and bones made meek shall full out make joy.
PSA 51:9 Turn away thy face from my sins; and do away all my wickednesses.
PSA 51:10 God, make thou a clean heart in me; and make thou new a rightful spirit in my entrails.
PSA 51:11 Cast thou me not away from thy face; and take thou not away from me thine holy spirit.
PSA 51:12 Give thou to me the gladness of thine health; and confirm thou me with the principal spirit.
PSA 51:13 I shall teach wicked men thy ways; and unfaithful men shall be converted to thee.
PSA 51:14 God, the God of mine health, deliver thou me from bloods, or sins; and my tongue shall joyfully sing of thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]].
PSA 51:15 Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall tell thy praising.
PSA 51:16 For if thou haddest would or desired sacrifice, I had given it; truly thou shalt not delight in burnt sacrifice.
PSA 51:17 A sacrifice to God is a spirit troubled, that is, sorry for sin; God, thou shalt not despise a contrite heart, and made meek.
PSA 51:18 Lord, do thou benignly in thy good will to Zion; that the walls of Jerusalem be builded.
PSA 51:19 Then thou shalt take pleasantly the sacrifice of rightfulness [[or rightwise-ness]], offerings, and burnt sacrifices; then they shall put calves on thine altar.
PSA 52:1 To victory, the psalm of David, when Doeg the Idumaean came, and told to Saul, and said to him, David came into the house of Ahimelech. What hast thou glory in malice; which art mighty in wickedness?
PSA 52:2 All day thy tongue thought unright-fulness; as a sharp razor thou hast done guile [[or treachery]].
PSA 52:3 Thou lovedest malice more than benignity; and wickedness more than to speak equity.
PSA 52:4 Thou lovedest all words of casting down; with a guileful [[or treacherous]] tongue.
PSA 52:5 Therefore God shall destroy thee into the end, he shall draw thee out by the root, and he shall make thee to pass away from thy tabernacle; and thy root from the land of living men.
PSA 52:6 Just [[or Rightwise]] men shall see, and shall dread; and they shall laugh on him,
PSA 52:7 and they shall say, Lo! the man that setted [[or put]] not God his helper. But he hoped in the multitude of his riches; and had mastery in his vanity.
PSA 52:8 Forsooth I, as a fruitful olive tree in the house of God; hoped in the mercy of God without end, and into the world of world.
PSA 52:9 I shall acknowledge to thee into the world, for thou hast done mercy to me; and I shall abide thy name, for it is good in the sight of thy saints.
PSA 53:1 To the overcomer, by the quire or choir, the learning of David. The unwise man said in his heart, God is not. They be corrupt, and made abom-inable in their wickednesses; none is that doeth good.
PSA 53:2 God beheld from heaven on the sons of men; that he see, if there is any understanding, either seeking God.
PSA 53:3 All bowed away, they be made unprofitable altogether; none is that doeth good, there is not till to one.
PSA 53:4 Whether all men, that work wicked-ness, shall not know; which devour my people, as the meat of bread? They called not God;
PSA 53:5 there they trembled for dread, where no dread was. For God hath scattered the bones of them, that please men; they be shamed, for God hath forsaken them.
PSA 53:6 Who shall give from Zion health to Israel? when the Lord hath turned the captivity of his people, Jacob shall full out make joy, and Israel shall be glad.
PSA 54:1 To victory, in organs, either in psalms, the learning of David, when Ziphims came, and said to Saul, Whether David is not hid at us? God, in thy name, make thou me safe; and in thy virtue, deem thou me.
PSA 54:2 God, hear thou my prayer; with ears perceive thou the words of my mouth.
PSA 54:3 For aliens have risen against me, and strong men sought my life; and they setted not God before their sight.
PSA 54:4 For lo! God helpeth me; and the Lord is the up-taker of my soul.
PSA 54:5 Turn thou away evils to mine enemies; and lose thou them in thy truth.
PSA 54:6 Willfully I shall sacrifice to thee; and, Lord, I shall acknowledge to thy name, for it is good.
PSA 54:7 For thou deliveredest me from all tribulation; and mine eye despised on mine enemies.
PSA 55:1 To victory, in organs, the learning of David. God, hear thou my prayer, and despise thou not my beseeching;
PSA 55:2 give thou attention to me, and hear thou me. I am sorrowful in mine exercising;
PSA 55:3 and I am disturbed of the face of the enemy, and of the tribulation of the sinner. For they bowed wicked-nesses into me; and in ire they were dis-easeful to me.
PSA 55:4 Mine heart was troubled in me; and the dread of death felled on me.
PSA 55:5 Dread and trembling came on me; and darknesses covered me.
PSA 55:6 And I said, Who shall give to me feathers, as of a culver; and I shall fly, and shall take rest?
PSA 55:7 Lo! I went far away, and fled; and I dwelled in wilderness.
PSA 55:8 I abode him, that made me safe from the littleness, either dread, of spirit; and from tempest.
PSA 55:9 Lord, cast thou down, [[and]] part thou the tongues of them; for I saw wickedness and against-saying in the city.
PSA 55:10 By day and night wickedness shall encompass it on the walls thereof; and travail and unrightfulness be in the midst of them.
PSA 55:11 And usury and guile [[or treachery]] failed not; from the streets thereof.
PSA 55:12 For if mine enemy had cursed me; soothly I had suffered. And if he, that hated me, had spoken great things on me; in hap I had hid me from him.
PSA 55:13 But thou art a man of one will; my leader, and my known.
PSA 55:14 Which tookest together sweet meats and fellowship with me; we went with consent in the house of God.
PSA 55:15 Death come on them; and go they down quick into hell. For way-wardnesses be in the dwelling places of them; in the midst of them.
PSA 55:16 But I cried to thee, Lord; and the Lord saved me.
PSA 55:17 In the eventide, and [[the]] morrow-tide, and in midday, I shall tell, and show; and he shall hear my voice.
PSA 55:18 He shall again-buy my soul in peace from them, that nigh to me; for among many they were with me.
PSA 55:19 God shall hear; and he that is before the worlds shall make them low. For changing is not to them, and they dreaded not God;
PSA 55:20 he holdeth forth his hand in yielding. They defouled his testament,
PSA 55:21 the cheers thereof were parted from ire; and his heart nighed. The words thereof were softer than oil; and they be darts.
PSA 55:22 Cast thy care, or thought, [[or thy busyness]], on the Lord, and he shall fully nourish thee; and he shall not give without end fluttering to a just [[or rightwise]] man.
PSA 55:23 But thou, God, shalt lead them forth; into the pit of death. Men-quellers and beguilers shall not have half their days; but, Lord, I shall hope in thee.
PSA 56:1 To the overcoming, on the dumb culver of far drawing away, the comely song of David, when the Philistines held him in Gath. God, have mercy on me, for a man hath defouled me; all day he impugned, and troubled me.
PSA 56:2 Mine enemies defouled me all day; for many fighters were against me.
PSA 56:3 Of the highness of day I shall dread; but God, I shall hope in thee.
PSA 56:4 In God I shall praise my words; I hoped in God, I shall not dread what thing flesh, or man, shall do to me.
PSA 56:5 All day they cursed my words; against me all their thoughts were into evil.
PSA 56:6 They shall dwell, and they shall hide; they shall ambush mine heel. As they abide my life,
PSA 56:7 for nought shalt thou make them safe; in ire thou shalt break altogether peoples.
PSA 56:8 God, I showed my life to thee; thou hast set [[or puttest]] my tears in thy sight. As and in thy promise, Lord;
PSA 56:9 then mine enemies shall be turned aback. In whatever day I shall inwardly call thee; lo! I have known, that thou art my God.
PSA 56:10 In God I shall praise a word; in the Lord I shall praise a word.
PSA 56:11 I shall hope in God; I shall not dread what thing man shall do to me.
PSA 56:12 God, thine avows [[or vows]] be in me; which I shall yield praisings to thee.
PSA 56:13 For thou hast delivered my life from death, and my feet from sliding; that I please before God in the light of them that live.
PSA 57:1 To the victory, lose thou not the seemly song, either the sweet song, of David, when he fled from the face of Saul into the den. God, have mercy on me, have thou mercy on me; for my soul trusteth in thee. And I shall hope in the shadow of thy wings; till wickedness pass.
PSA 57:2 I shall cry to God alder-highest; to God that did well to me.
PSA 57:3 He sent from heaven, and delivered me; he gave into shame them that defoul me. God sent his mercy and his truth,
PSA 57:4 and delivered my soul from the midst of whelps of lions; I slept troubled or disturbed. The sons of men, the teeth of them be armours [[or arms]] and arrows; and their tongue is a sharp sword.
PSA 57:5 God, be thou enhanced above heavens; and thy glory above all earth.
PSA 57:6 They made ready a snare to my feet; and they greatly bowed my life. They delved a ditch before my face; and they felled [[or fell]] down into it.
PSA 57:7 God, mine heart is ready, mine heart is ready; I shall sing, and I shall say psalm.
PSA 57:8 My glory, rise thou up; psaltery and harp, rise thou up; I shall rise up early.
PSA 57:9 Lord, I shall acknowledge to thee among peoples; and I shall say psalm [[to thee]] among heathen men.
PSA 57:10 For thy mercy is magnified till to heavens; and thy truth till to the clouds.
PSA 57:11 God, be thou enhanced above heavens; and thy glory above all earth.
PSA 58:1 To victory, lose thou not the sweet song, either the seemly psalm, of David. Forsooth if ye speak rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] verily; ye sons of men, deem rightfully [[or evenly]].
PSA 58:2 For in heart ye work wickedness in earth; your hands make ready unrightfulnesses [[or unrightwisenesses]].
PSA 58:3 Sinners were made aliens from the womb; they erred from the womb, they spake false things.
PSA 58:4 Strong vengeance is to them, by the likeness of a serpent; as of a deaf snake, and stopping his ears.
PSA 58:5 Which shall not hear the voice of charmers; and of a venom-maker charming ever so wisely.
PSA 58:6 God shall all-break the teeth of them in their mouth; the Lord shall break altogether the great teeth of lions.
PSA 58:7 They shall come to nought, as water running away; he bent his bow, till they be made sick.
PSA 58:8 As wax that floateth [[or floweth]] away, they shall be taken away; fire fell above, and they saw not the sun.
PSA 58:9 Before that your thorns understood the rhamn, either thieve-thorn; he swalloweth them so in ire, as with living men.
PSA 58:10 The just [[or rightwise]] man shall be glad, when he shall see vengeance; he shall wash his hands in the blood of a sinner.
PSA 58:11 And a man shall say truly, For fruit is to a just [[or rightwise]] man; truly God is deeming them in earth.
PSA 59:1 To the overcomer, lose thou not the seemly song of David, when Saul sent men and kept the house, to slay him. My God, deliver thou me from mine enemies; and deliver thou me from them that rise against me.
PSA 59:2 Deliver thou me from them that work wickedness; and save thou me from men-quellers.
PSA 59:3 For lo! they have taken my soul; strong men fell in on me. Neither for my wickedness, neither for my sin;
PSA 59:4 Lord, I ran without wickedness, and dressed my works. Rise up into my meeting, and see;
PSA 59:5 and thou, Lord God of virtues, art God of Israel. Give thou attention to visit all folks; do thou not mercy to all that work wickedness.
PSA 59:6 They shall be turned at eventide, and they as dogs shall suffer hunger; and they shall compass, that is, go abegging in, the city.
PSA 59:7 Lo! they shall speak in their mouth, and a sword in their lips; for who heard?
PSA 59:8 And thou, Lord, shalt scorn them; thou shalt bring all folks to nought.
PSA 59:9 I shall keep my strength to thee; for God is mine up-taker,
PSA 59:10 my God, his mercy shall come before me. God showed to me my desire on mine enemies,
PSA 59:11 slay thou not them; lest any time my peoples forget. Scatter thou them in thy virtue; and, Lord, my defender, put thou them down.
PSA 59:12 Put down the trespass of their mouth, and the word of their lips; and be they taken in their pride. And of cursing and of leasing; they shall be showed in the ending.
PSA 59:13 In the ire of ending, and they shall not be; and they shall know, that the Lord shall be Lord of Jacob, and of the ends of earth.
PSA 59:14 They shall be turned at eventide, and they as dogs shall suffer hunger; and they shall compass, that is, go abegging in, the city.
PSA 59:15 They shall be scattered abroad, for to eat; soothly if they be not [[ful]] filled, and they shall grutch.
PSA 59:16 But I shall sing of thy strength; and early I shall enhance thy mercy. For thou art made mine up-taker; and my refuge, in the day of my tribulation.
PSA 59:17 Mine helper, I shall sing to thee; for thou art God, mine up-taker, my God, my mercy.
PSA 60:1 To victory, on the witnessing of the rose, the sweet song of David, to teach men, when he fought against Aram of floods, and Syria of Zobah; and Joab turned again, and smote Edom in the valley of salt pits, twelve thousand. God, thou hast put away us, and thou hast destroyed us; thou were wroth, and thou hast done mercy to us.
PSA 60:2 Thou movedest the earth, and thou troubledest it; make thou whole the sorrows thereof, for it is moved.
PSA 60:3 Thou showedest hard things to thy people; thou gavest drink to us with the wine of compunction.
PSA 60:4 Thou hast given a signifying to them that dread thee; that they flee from the face of the bow.
PSA 60:5 That thy darlings be delivered; make thou safe with thy right hand, and hear thou me.
PSA 60:6 God spake by [[or in]] his holy place; I shall be glad, and I shall part Shechem, and I shall mete [[or measure]] the great valley of tabernacles.
PSA 60:7 Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; and Ephraim is the strength of mine head. Judah is my king;
PSA 60:8 Moab is the pot of mine hope. Into Idumea I shall stretch forth my shoe; aliens be made subject to me.
PSA 60:9 Who shall lead me into a city made strong; who shall lead me into Idumea?
PSA 60:10 Whether not thou, God, that hast put away us; and shalt thou not, God, go out in our virtues?
PSA 60:11 Lord, give thou to us help out of tribulation; for the help of man is vain.
PSA 60:12 In God we shall make virtue; and he shall bring to nought them that trouble or disturb us.
PSA 61:1 To victory, on organs, to David himself. God, hear thou my beseech-ing; give thou attention to my prayer.
PSA 61:2 From the ends of the land I cried to thee; the while mine heart was anguished, thou enhancedest me in a stone. Thou leddest me forth,
PSA 61:3 for thou art made mine hope; a tower of strength from the face of the enemy.
PSA 61:4 I shall dwell in thy tabernacle into worlds; I shall be covered in the covering of thy wings.
PSA 61:5 For thou, my God, hast heard my prayer; thou hast given heritage to them that dread thy name.
PSA 61:6 Thou shalt add, either increase, days on[[to]] the days of the king; his years till into the day of generation and of generation.
PSA 61:7 He dwelleth without end in the sight of God; who shall seek the mercy and truth of him?
PSA 61:8 So I shall say psalm to thy name into the world of world; that I yield my vows from day into day.
PSA 62:1 To victory, over Jeduthun, the psalm of David. Whether my soul shall not be subject to God; for mine health is of him.
PSA 62:2 For why he is both my God, and mine health; mine up-taker, I shall no more be moved.
PSA 62:3 How long fall ye on a man? all ye slain; as to a wall bowed, and as a wall of stone without mortar cast down.
PSA 62:4 Nevertheless they thought to put away my price, I ran in thirst; with their mouth they blessed, and in their heart they cursed.
PSA 62:5 Nevertheless, my soul, be thou subject to God; for my patience is of him.
PSA 62:6 For he is my God, and my saviour; mine helper, I shall not pass out.
PSA 62:7 Mine health, and my glory is in God; God is the giver of mine help, and mine hope is in God.
PSA 62:8 All the gathering together of the people, hope ye in God, pour ye out your hearts before him; God is our helper without end.
PSA 62:9 Nevertheless the sons of men be vain; the sons of men be liars in balances, that they deceive of vanity into the same thing.
PSA 62:10 Do not ye have hope in wicked-ness, and do not ye covet ravens; if riches be plenteous, do not ye set the heart thereto.
PSA 62:11 God spake once, I heard these two things; that power is of God,
PSA 62:12 and, thou Lord, mercy is to thee; for thou shalt yield to each man by his works.
PSA 63:1 The psalm of David, when he was in the desert of Judah. God, my God, I wake to thee full early. My soul thirsted to thee; my flesh thirsted to thee full manyfold. In a land forsaken without way, and without water,
PSA 63:2 so I appeared to thee in holy; that I should see thy virtue, and thy glory.
PSA 63:3 For thy mercy is better than lives or life itself; my lips shall praise thee.
PSA 63:4 So I shall bless thee in my life; and in thy name I shall raise mine hands.
PSA 63:5 My soul be [[ful]] filled as with inner fatness and uttermore fatness; and my mouth shall praise with lips of full out joying.
PSA 63:6 So I had mind on thee on my bed, in the morrowtides I shall think of thee;
PSA 63:7 for thou hast been mine helper. And in the covering of thy wings I shall make full out joy,
PSA 63:8 my soul cleaved after thee; thy right hand took me up.
PSA 63:9 Forsooth they sought in vain my life, they shall enter into the lower things of earth;
PSA 63:10 they shall be betaken into the hands of sword, they shall be made the parts of foxes.
PSA 63:11 But the king shall be glad in God; and all men shall be praised that swear in him; for the mouth of them, that speak wicked things, is stopped.
PSA 64:1 To victory, the psalm of David. God, hear thou my prayer, when I beseech; deliver thou my soul from dread of the enemy.
PSA 64:2 Thou hast defended me from the covent or convent of evil-doers; from the multitude of them that work wickedness.
PSA 64:3 For they sharpened their tongues as a sword, they bend their bow, a bitter thing;
PSA 64:4 for to shoot in huddles, or privates, him that is unwemmed. Suddenly they shall shoot him, and they shall not dread;
PSA 64:5 they made steadfast to themselves a wicked word. They told, that they should hide snares; they said, Who shall see them?
PSA 64:6 They sought wickednesses; they sought, and failed not in seeking. A man nighed to [[a]] deep heart;
PSA 64:7 and God shall be enhanced. The arrows of little men, that is, of envious men, be made the wounds of them;
PSA 64:8 and the tongues of them be made sick against them. All men be troubled, that saw them;
PSA 64:9 and each man dreaded. And they told the works of God; and they understood the deeds of him.
PSA 64:10 The just [[or rightwise]] man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in him; and all men of rightful heart shall be praised.
PSA 65:1 To victory, the psalm of the song of David. God, praising becometh thee in Zion; and a vow shall be yielded to thee in Jerusalem.
PSA 65:2 Hear thou my prayer; each man shall come to thee.
PSA 65:3 The words of wicked men had the mastery over us; and thou shalt do mercy to our wickednesses.
PSA 65:4 Blessed is he, whom thou hast chosen, and hast taken; he shall dwell in thy foreyards. We shall be [[ful]] filled with the goods of thine house; thy temple is holy,
PSA 65:5 wonderful in equity. God, our health, hear thou us; thou art hope of all coasts of earth, and in the sea afar.
PSA 65:6 And thou makest ready hills in thy virtue, and art girded with power;
PSA 65:7 which troublest the depth of the sea, the sound of the waves thereof. Folks shall be troubled,
PSA 65:8 and they that dwell in the ends shall dread of thy signs; thou shalt delight the outgoings of the morrow-tide and eventide.
PSA 65:9 Thou hast visited the land, and hast greatly filled it; thou hast multiplied to make it rich. The flood of God was [[full-]]filled with waters; thou madest ready the meat of them, for the making ready thereof is so.
PSA 65:10 Thou filling greatly the streams thereof, multiply the fruits thereof; the land bringing forth fruits shall be glad in the gutters of it.
PSA 65:11 Thou shalt bless the crown of the year of thy good will; and thy fields shall be [[full-]]filled with plenty of fruits.
PSA 65:12 The fair things of desert shall wax fat; and little hills shall be encom-passed with full out joying.
PSA 65:13 The wethers of sheep be clothed, and valleys shall be plenteous of wheat; they shall cry out, and soothly they shall say praising or psalm.
PSA 66:1 To victory, the song of[[the]]psalm. All the earth, make ye joy heartily to God,
PSA 66:2 say ye psalm to his name; give ye glory to his praising.
PSA 66:3 Say ye to God, Lord, thy works be full dreadful; in the multitude of thy virtue thine enemies shall lie down to thee.
PSA 66:4 God, all the earth worship thee, and sing to thee; say it psalm to thy name.
PSA 66:5 Come ye and see ye the works of God; fearedful in counsels on the sons of men.
PSA 66:6 Which turned the sea into dry land; in the flood they shall pass [[through]] with foot, there we shall be glad in him.
PSA 66:7 The which is Lord in his virtue without end, his eyes behold on folks; they that make sharp be not enhanced in themselves.
PSA 66:8 Ye heathen men, bless our God; and make ye heard the voice of his praising.
PSA 66:9 That hath set my soul to life, and gave not my feet into stirring.
PSA 66:10 For thou, God, hast proved us; thou hast examined us by fire, as silver is examined.
PSA 66:11 Thou leddest us into a snare, thou puttedest tribulations in our back;
PSA 66:12 thou settedest [[or puttest]] men on our heads. We passed by [[or through]] fire and water; and thou leddest us out into refreshing.
PSA 66:13 I shall enter into thine house in burnt sacrifices; I shall yield to thee my vows,
PSA 66:14 which my lips spake distinctly. And my mouth spake in my tribulation;
PSA 66:15 I shall offer to thee burnt sacrifices full of marrow, with the burning of rams; I shall offer to thee oxes [[or oxen]] with bucks of goats.
PSA 66:16 All ye that dread God, come and hear, and I shall tell; how great things he hath done to my soul.
PSA 66:17 I cried to him with my mouth; and I joyed fully [[or full out joyed]] under my tongue.
PSA 66:18 If I beheld wickedness in mine heart; the Lord shall not hear.
PSA 66:19 Therefore God heard; and he per-ceived the voice of my beseeching.
PSA 66:20 Blessed be God; that removed not my prayer, nor his mercy from me.
PSA 67:1 To victory in organs, the psalm of the song. God have mercy on us, and bless us; lighten he his cheer on us, and have he mercy on us.
PSA 67:2 That we know thy way on earth; thine health in all folks.
PSA 67:3 God, peoples acknowledge to thee; all peoples acknowledge to thee.
PSA 67:4 Heathen men be glad, and make fully joy [[or and full out joy]], for thou deemest peoples in equity; and dressest heathen men in earth.
PSA 67:5 God, peoples acknowledge to thee, all peoples acknowledge to thee;
PSA 67:6 the earth hath given his fruit. God, our God, bless us,
PSA 67:7 God bless us; and all the coasts of earth dread him.
PSA 68:1 To victory, the psalm of the song of David. God rise up, and his enemies be scattered; and they that hate him, flee from his face.
PSA 68:2 As smoke faileth, fail they; as wax floateth [[or floweth]] from the face of fire, so perish [[the]] sinners from the face of God.
PSA 68:3 And just [[or rightwise]] men eat, and make they fully joy [[or full out glad they]] in the sight of God; and delight they in gladness.
PSA 68:4 Sing ye to God, say ye psalm to his name; make ye [[a]] way to him, that ascendeth [[or goeth up]] on the going down, the Lord is name of him. Make ye fully joy [[or Full out joyeth]] in his sight, his enemies shall be troubled from the face of him,
PSA 68:5 which is the father of fatherless and motherless children; and the judge of widows. God is in his holy place;
PSA 68:6 God that maketh men of one will to dwell in the house. Which leadeth out by strength them that be bound; in like manner them that make sharp [[or that stir]], that dwell in sepulchres.
PSA 68:7 God, when thou wentest out in the sight of thy people; when thou passedest forth in the desert.
PSA 68:8 The earth was moved, for heavens dropped down from the face of God of Sinai; from the face of God of Israel.
PSA 68:9 God, thou shalt impart willful rain to thine heritage, and it was sick; but thou madest it perfect.
PSA 68:10 Thy beasts shall dwell therein; God, thou hast made ready in thy sweetness to the poor man.
PSA 68:11 The Lord shall give a word; to them that preach the gospel with much virtue.
PSA 68:12 The kings of virtues be made loved of the darling; and to the fair-ness of the house to part spoils.
PSA 68:13 If ye sleep among the midst of sorts, either heritages, yet ye shall be as the feathers of the culver that be covered of silver; and the hinder things of the back thereof be in the shining of gold.
PSA 68:14 While the king of heaven deemeth kings thereon, they shall be made whiter than snow in Zalmon;
PSA 68:15 the hill of God is a fat hill. The crudded hill is a fat hill;
PSA 68:16 whereto believe ye falsely, ye crudded hills? The hill in which it pleaseth well God to dwell therein; for the Lord shall dwell into the end.
PSA 68:17 The chariot of God is manyfold with ten thousand, a thousand of them that be glad; the Lord was in them, in Sinai, in the holy place.
PSA 68:18 Thou ascendedest on high, thou tookest captivity captive; thou receiv-edest gifts among men. For why thou tookest also from them that believed not; for to dwell in the Lord God.
PSA 68:19 Blessed be the Lord each day; the God of our healths shall make an easy way to us.
PSA 68:20 Our God is God to make men safe; and outgoing [[or the going-out]] from death is of the Lord God.
PSA 68:21 Nevertheless God shall break the heads of his enemies; the top of the hair of them that go in their trespasses.
PSA 68:22 The Lord said, I shall turn from Bashan; I shall turn into the depth of the sea.
PSA 68:23 That thy foot be dipped in blood; the tongue of thy dogs be dipped in blood of the enemies of him.
PSA 68:24 God, they saw thy goings in; the goings-in [[or in-goings]] of my God, of my king, which is in the holy place.
PSA 68:25 Princes joined with singers came before; in the middle or in the midst of young damsels singing in tympans.
PSA 68:26 In churches bless ye God; bless ye the Lord from the wells of Israel.
PSA 68:27 There is Benjamin, a young man; in the ravishing of mind. The princes of Judah were the dukes of them; the princes of Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali.
PSA 68:28 God, command thou to thy virtue; God, confirm thou this thing, which thou hast wrought in us.
PSA 68:29 From thy temple, which is in Jerusalem; kings shall offer gifts to thee.
PSA 68:30 Blame thou the wild beasts of the reed, the gathering together of bulls is among the kine of peoples; that they exclude them that be proved by silver. Destroy thou folks that will or desire battles,
PSA 68:31 legates shall come from Egypt; Ethiopia shall come before the hands thereof to God.
PSA 68:32 Realms of the earth, sing ye to God; say ye psalm to the Lord. Sing ye to God;
PSA 68:33 that ascended [[or went up]] on the heaven of heaven at the east. Lo! he shall give to his voice the voice of virtue,
PSA 68:34 give ye glory to God on Israel; his great doing and his virtue is in the clouds.
PSA 68:35 God is wonderful in his saints; God of Israel, he shall give virtue, and strength, to his people; blessed be God.
PSA 69:1 To victory, on the roses of David. God, make thou me safe; for waters have entered unto my soul.
PSA 69:2 I am set in the slime of the depth; and there is no substance. I came into the depth of the sea; and the tempest drenched or drowned me [[down]].
PSA 69:3 I travailed crying, my cheeks were made hoarse; mine eyes failed, the while I hope/d into my God.
PSA 69:4 They that hated me without cause; were multiplied above the hairs of mine head. Mine enemies that pursued me unjustly were comforted; I paid then for those things, which I ravished not.
PSA 69:5 God, thou knowest mine unknow-ing; and my trespasses be not hid from thee.
PSA 69:6 Lord, Lord of virtues; they, that abide thee, be not ashamed in me. God of Israel; they, that seek thee, be not shamed on me.
PSA 69:7 For I suffered shame for thee; shame covered my face.
PSA 69:8 I am made a stranger to my brethren; and a pilgrim to the sons of my mother.
PSA 69:9 For the fervent love of thine house ate me; and the shames of men saying shames to thee fell on me.
PSA 69:10 And I covered my soul with fasting; and it was made into shame to me.
PSA 69:11 And I putted [[or put]]for my cloth an hair-shirt; and I am made to them into a parable.
PSA 69:12 They, that sat in the gate, spake against me; and they, that drank wine, sang of me.
PSA 69:13 But Lord, I dress my prayer to thee; God, I abide the time of good pleasance. Hear thou me in the multitude of thy mercy; in the truth of thine health.
PSA 69:14 Deliver thou me from the clay, that I be not fast set-in; deliver thou me from them that hate me, and from [[the]] depths or deepness of waters.
PSA 69:15 The tempest of water drench not me [[down]], neither the depth swallow me; neither the pit make strait his mouth on me.
PSA 69:16 Lord, hear thou me, for thy mercy is benign; after the multitude of thy merciful doings behold thou into me.
PSA 69:17 And turn not away thy face from thy servant; for I am in tribulation, hear thou me swiftly.
PSA 69:18 Give thou attention to my soul, and deliver thou it; for mine enemies, deliver thou me.
PSA 69:19 Thou knowest my reproof, and my despising; and my shame. All that trouble me be in thy sight;
PSA 69:20 mine heart abode in shame, and wretchedness. And I abode him, that was sorry together with me, and none was; and that should comfort me, and I found not.
PSA 69:21 And they gave gall into my meat; and in my thirst they gave to me drink with vinegar.
PSA 69:22 The board of them be made before them into a snare; and into yieldings, and into cause of stumbling.
PSA 69:23 Their eyes be made dark, that they see not; and ever[[more]] bow down the back of them.
PSA 69:24 Shed [[or Pour]] out thine ire [[or wrath]] on them; and the strong vengeance of thine ire take them.
PSA 69:25 The habitation of them be made forsaken; and be there none that dwell in the tabernacles of them.
PSA 69:26 For they pursued him, whom thou hast smitten; and they added on the sorrow of my wounds.
PSA 69:27 Add thou wickedness on the wickedness of them; and enter they not into thy rightwiseness.
PSA 69:28 Be they done away from the book of living men; and be they not written with just [[or rightwise]] men.
PSA 69:29 I am poor and sorrowful; God, thine health [[or salvation]] took me up.
PSA 69:30 I shall praise the name of God with song; and I shall magnify him with praising.
PSA 69:31 And it shall please God more than a new calf bringing forth horns and claws.
PSA 69:32 Poor men see, and be glad; seek ye God, and your soul shall live.
PSA 69:33 For the Lord heard poor men; and despised not his bound men.
PSA 69:34 Heavens and earth, praise him; the sea, and all creeping beasts in those, praise him.
PSA 69:35 For God shall make safe Zion; and the cities of Judah shall be builded. And they shall dwell there; and they shall get it by heritage.
PSA 69:36 And the seed of his servants shall have it in possession; and they that love his name, shall dwell therein.
PSA 70:1 To the victory, [[the psalm]]of David, to have mind. God, behold thou into mine help; Lord, haste thou to help me.
PSA 70:2 Be they shamed, and ashamed; that seek my life. Be they turned aback; and shame they, that will or desire evils to me.
PSA 70:3 Be they turned away anon, and shame they; that say to me, Well! well!
PSA 70:4 All men that seek thee, make fully joy [[or full out joy they]], and be glad in thee; and they that love thine health, say ever[[more]], The Lord be magnified.
PSA 70:5 Forsooth I am a needy man, and poor; God help thou me. Thou art mine helper and my deliverer; Lord, tarry thou not.
PSA 71:1 Lord, I hoped in thee; be I not shamed without end;
PSA 71:2 in thy rightwiseness deliver thou me, and ravish me out. Bow down thine ear to me; and make me safe.
PSA 71:3 Be thou to me into God a defender; and into a strengthened place, that thou make me safe. For thou art my steadfastness; and my refuge.
PSA 71:4 My God, deliver thou me from the hand of the sinner; and from the hand of a man doing against the law, and of the wicked man.
PSA 71:5 For thou, Lord, art my patience; Lord, thou art mine hope from my youth.
PSA 71:6 In thee I am confirmed, that is, defended, from the womb; thou art my defender from the womb of my mother. My singing is ever[[more]] in thee;
PSA 71:7 I am made as a great wonder to many men; and thou art a strong helper.
PSA 71:8 My mouth be filled with praising; that I sing thy glory, all day thy great-ness.
PSA 71:9 Cast thou not away me in the time of eld age /in the time of oldness; when my strength faileth, forsake thou not me.
PSA 71:10 For mine enemies said of me; and they that kept my life made counsel together.
PSA 71:11 Saying, God hath forsaken him; pursue ye, and take him; for none there is that shall deliver.
PSA 71:12 God, be thou not made afar from me; my God, behold thou into mine help.
PSA 71:13 Men that backbite my soul, be shamed, and fail they; and be they covered with reproof and shame, that seek evils to me.
PSA 71:14 But I shall hope ever[[more]]; and I shall add to ever over all thy praising.
PSA 71:15 My mouth shall tell thy rightful-ness [[or rightwiseness]]; all day thine health. For I knew not by literature, that is, by man’s teaching, but by God’s revelation,
PSA 71:16 I shall enter into the powers of the Lord; Lord, I shall bethink on thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] alone.
PSA 71:17 God, thou hast taught me from my youth, and till to now; I shall tell out thy marvels.
PSA 71:18 And till into eld age /into oldness, and the last age; God, forsake thou not me. Till I tell thine arm, or power, to each generation that shall come.
PSA 71:19 Till I tell of thy might, and thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], God, till into the highest great deeds which thou hast done; God, who is like thee?
PSA 71:20 How great tribulations, many and evil, hast thou showed to me; and thou converted, hast quickened me, and hast again-brought me again from the depths of earth.
PSA 71:21 Thou hast multiplied thy great doing; and thou converted, hast comforted me.
PSA 71:22 For why and I shall acknowledge to thee, thou God, thy truth in the instruments of psalm; I shall sing in an harp to thee, that art the holy of Israel.
PSA 71:23 My lips shall make fully joy [[or full out joy]], when I shall sing to thee; and my soul, which thou again-boughtest.
PSA 71:24 But and my tongue shall think all day on thy rightfulness [[or rightwise-ness]]; when they shall be shamed and ashamed, that seek evils to me.
PSA 72:1 To Solomon. God, give thy doom to the king; and thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] to the son of the king.
PSA 72:2 To deem thy people in rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and thy poor men in doom.
PSA 72:3 Mountains receive peace to the people; and little hills receive rightful-ness [[or rightwiseness]].
PSA 72:4 He shall deem the poor men of the people, and he shall make safe the sons of poor men; and he shall make low the false challenger.
PSA 72:5 And he shall dwell with the sun, and before the moon, that is, without beginning, and end; in generation and into generation.
PSA 72:6 He shall come down as rain into a fleece; and as gutters dropping on the earth.
PSA 72:7 Rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] shall come forth in his days; and the abun-dance of peace, till the moon be taken away.
PSA 72:8 And he shall be lord from the sea till to the sea; and from the flood till to the ends of the world.
PSA 72:9 Ethiopians shall fall down before him; and his enemies shall lick the earth.
PSA 72:10 The kings of Tarshish and isles shall offer gifts; the kings of Arabia and of Seba shall bring gifts.
PSA 72:11 And all kings shall worship him; all folks shall serve him.
PSA 72:12 For he shall deliver a poor man from the mighty; and a poor man to whom there was none helper.
PSA 72:13 He shall spare a poor man and needy; and he shall make safe the souls of poor men.
PSA 72:14 He shall again-buy the souls of them from usuries, and wickedness; and the name of them is honourable before him.
PSA 72:15 And he shall live, and men shall give to him of the gold of Arabia; and they shall ever worship of him, all day they shall bless him.
PSA 72:16 Steadfastness shall be in the earth, in the highest place of mountains; the fruit thereof shall be enhanced above the Lebanon; and they shall blossom from the city, as the hay of earth doeth.
PSA 72:17 His name be blessed into worlds; his name dwell before the sun. And all the lineages of earth shall be blessed in him; all folks shall magnify him.
PSA 72:18 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; which alone maketh marvels.
PSA 72:19 And blessed be the name of his majesty without end; and all earth shall be filled with his majesty; be it done, be it done.
PSA 72:20 The prayers, [[or praisings, or hymns]], of David, the son of Jesse, be ended.
PSA 73:1 The psalm of Asaph. God of Israel is full good; to them that be of rightful [[or right]] heart.
PSA 73:2 But my feet were moved almost; my steps were shed [[or poured]] out almost.
PSA 73:3 For I loved fervently on wicked men; seeing the peace of sinners.
PSA 73:4 For beholding is not to the death of them; and steadfastness in the sick-ness of them.
PSA 73:5 They be not in travail of other men; and they shall not be beaten with men.
PSA 73:6 Therefore pride hath held them; they were covered with their wicked-ness and unfaithfulness.
PSA 73:7 The wickedness of them came forth as of fatness; they went into desire of heart.
PSA 73:8 They thought and spake wayward-ness; they spake wickedness on high.
PSA 73:9 They putted [[or put]] their mouth into heaven; and their tongue passed in [[the]] earth.
PSA 73:10 Therefore my people shall be turned again here; and full days shall be found in them.
PSA 73:11 And they said, How knoweth God; and whether knowing is on high?
PSA 73:12 Lo! those sinners and having abundance in the world; held riches.
PSA 73:13 And I said, Therefore without cause I justified mine heart; and washed mine hands among innocents.
PSA 73:14 And I was beaten all day; and my chastising was in morrowtides.
PSA 73:15 If I said, I shall tell thus; lo! I [[have]] reproved the nation of thy sons.
PSA 73:16 I guessed, that I should know this; but too much travail is before me.
PSA 73:17 Till I enter into the saintuary of God; and understand in the last things of them.
PSA 73:18 Nevertheless for guiles [[or treach-eries]] thou hast put to them; thou castedest them down, while they were raised.
PSA 73:19 How be they made into desolation; they failed suddenly, they perished for their wickedness or waywardness.
PSA 73:20 As the dream of men that rise; Lord, thou shalt drive their image to nought, in thy city.
PSA 73:21 For mine heart is enflamed, and my reins be changed;
PSA 73:22 and I am driven to nought, and I knew not. As a work beast I am made with thee;
PSA 73:23 and I am ever with thee. Thou heldest my right hand,
PSA 73:24 and in thy will thou leddest me forth; and with glory thou tookest me up.
PSA 73:25 For why what is to me in heaven; and what would or desire I of thee on earth?
PSA 73:26 My flesh and mine heart failed; God of mine heart, and my part is God without end.
PSA 73:27 For lo! they that draw away far themselves from thee shall perish; thou hast lost all men that do forni-cation from thee.
PSA 73:28 But it is good to me to cleave to God; and to set [[or put]] mine hope in the Lord God. That I tell all thy preachings, in the gates of the daughter of Zion.
PSA 74:1 The learning of Asaph. God, why hast thou put us away into the end; thy strong vengeance is wroth on the sheep of thy pasture?
PSA 74:2 Be thou mindful of thy gathering together; which thou haddest in possession from the beginning. Thou again-boughtest the rod of thine heritage; the hill of Zion, in which thou dwelledest therein.
PSA 74:3 Raise thine hands into the prides of them; how great things the enemy did wickedly in the holy place.
PSA 74:4 And they that hated thee; had glory in the midst of thy solemnity. They setted their signs, either banners, to be signs on the highest place, as in the outgoing [[or going out]]; and they knew not.
PSA 74:5 As in a wood of trees, they hewed down with axes the gates thereof into itself;
PSA 74:6 they casted down it with an ax, and a broad falling ax.
PSA 74:7 They burnt with fire thy saintuary; they defouled the tabernacle of thy name in earth.
PSA 74:8 The kindred of them said together in their heart; Make we all the feast days of God to cease in the earth.
PSA 74:9 We have not seen our signs, now there is no prophet; and he shall no more know us.
PSA 74:10 God, how long shall the enemy say despite? the adversary stirreth to ire thy name into the end.
PSA 74:11 Why turnest thou away thine hand, to not draw out thy right hand from the midst of thy bosom, till into the end?
PSA 74:12 Forsooth God our king before worlds, wrought health in the midst of [[the]] earth.
PSA 74:13 Thou madest firm the sea by thy virtue; thou hast troubled the heads of the dragons in waters.
PSA 74:14 Thou hast broken the heads of the dragon; thou hast given him to be meat to the peoples of Ethiopians.
PSA 74:15 Thou hast broken wells, and strands [[or streams]]; thou madest dry the floods of Eitan.
PSA 74:16 The day is thine, and the night is thine; thou madest the morrowtide and the sun.
PSA 74:17 Thou madest all the ends of the earth; summer, and ver time, either springing time, thou formedest those [[or them]].
PSA 74:18 Be thou mindful of this thing, the enemy hath said shame to the Lord; and the unwise people hath excited to ire thy name.
PSA 74:19 Betake thou not to beasts men acknowledging to thee; and forget thou not into the end the souls of thy poor men.
PSA 74:20 Behold into thy testament; for they that be made dark of earth, be [[full-]]filled with the houses of wickednesses.
PSA 74:21 A meek man be not turned away made ashamed; a poor man and needy shall praise thy name.
PSA 74:22 God, rise up, deem thou thy cause; be thou mindful of thy shames, either upbraidings, of those that be all day of the unwise man.
PSA 74:23 Forget thou not the voices of thine enemies; the pride of them that hate thee ascendeth [[or goeth up]] ever-[[more]].
PSA 75:1 To the overcomer, lose thou not the psalm of the song of Asaph. God, we shall acknowledge to thee, we shall acknowledge; and we shall inwardly call thy name. We shall tell thy marvels;
PSA 75:2 when I shall take hold of the time, I shall deem with rightfulnesses.
PSA 75:3 The earth is melted, and all that dwell therein; I confirmed the pillars thereof.
PSA 75:4 I said to wicked men, Do not ye do wickedly; and to trespassers, Do not ye enhance the horn.
PSA 75:5 Do not ye raise on high your horn; do not ye speak wickedness against God.
PSA 75:6 For promotion cometh neither from the east, neither from the west, neither from desert hills;
PSA 75:7 for God is the judge. He meeketh this man, and enhanceth him;
PSA 75:8 for a cup of clean wine, full of meddling [[or mingling]], is in the hand of the Lord. And he bowed of this into that; nevertheless the dregs thereof is not diminished, either made less, for all [[the]] sinners of [[the]] earth shall drink thereof.
PSA 75:9 Forsooth I shall tell into the world; I shall sing to God of Jacob.
PSA 75:10 And I shall break all the horns of sinners; and the horns of the just [[or rightwise]] man shall be enhanced.
PSA 76:1 To the victory in organs, the psalm of the song of Asaph. God is known in Judah; his name is great in Israel.
PSA 76:2 And his place is made in peace; and his dwelling is in Zion.
PSA 76:3 There he brake powers; bow, shield, sword, and battle.
PSA 76:4 And thou, God, lightenest wonder-fully coming back from everlasting hills;
PSA 76:5 all unwise men of heart were troubled. They slept their sleep, that is, were dead; and all men found nothing of riches in their hands.
PSA 76:6 They that ascended [[or went up]] on horses; slept for thy blaming, thou God of Jacob.
PSA 76:7 Thou art fearful, and who shall against-stand thee? from that time of thine ire.
PSA 76:8 From heaven thou madest doom heard; the earth trembled, and rested.
PSA 76:9 When God rose up into doom; to make safe all the mild men of earth.
PSA 76:10 For the thought of man shall acknowledge to thee; and the remnants or leavings of thought shall make a feast day to thee.
PSA 76:11 Make ye a vow, and yield ye to your Lord God; all that bring gifts in the compass of it. To God fearedful,
PSA 76:12 and to him that taketh away the spirit of princes; to the fearedful at the kings of earth.
PSA 77:1 To the victory on Jeduthun, the psalm of Asaph. With my voice I cried to the Lord, with my voice to God; and he gave attention to me.
PSA 77:2 In the day of my tribulation I sought God with mine hands; in the night before or toward him, and I am not deceived. My soul forsook to be comforted;
PSA 77:3 I was mindful of God, and I delighted, and I was exercised; and my spirit failed.
PSA 77:4 Mine eyes before took wakings; I was troubled, and I spake not.
PSA 77:5 I thought on eld [[or old]] days; and I had in mind everlasting years.
PSA 77:6 And I thought in the night with mine heart; and I was exercised, and I cleansed my spirit.
PSA 77:7 Whether God shall cast away with-out end; either shall he not lay to, that he be more pleased yet?
PSA 77:8 Either shall he cut away his mercy into the end; from generation into generation?
PSA 77:9 Either shall God forget to do mercy; either shall he withhold his mercies in his ire [[or wrath]]?
PSA 77:10 And I said, Now I began; this is the changing of the right hand of the high God.
PSA 77:11 I had mind on the works of the Lord; for I shall have mind from the beginning of thy marvels.
PSA 77:12 And I shall think on all thy works; and I shall be exercised, either occupied, in thy findings.
PSA 77:13 God, thy way was in the holy place; what God is great as our God?
PSA 77:14 thou art God, that doest marvels. Thou madest thy virtue known among peoples;
PSA 77:15 thou again-boughtest in thine arm thy people, the sons of Jacob and of Joseph.
PSA 77:16 God, waters saw thee, waters saw thee, and dreaded; and depths of waters were troubled.
PSA 77:17 The multitude of the sound of waters; clouds gave voice. For why thine arrows pass [[through]];
PSA 77:18 the voice of thy thunder was in a wheel. Thy lightnings shined to the world; the earth was moved, and trembled.
PSA 77:19 Thy way in the sea, and thy paths in many waters; and thy steps shall not be known.
PSA 77:20 Thou leddest forth thy people as sheep; in the hand of Moses and Aaron.
PSA 78:1 The learning of Asaph. My people, perceive ye my law; bow your ear into the words of my mouth.
PSA 78:2 I shall open my mouth in parables; I shall speak perfect reasons [[or propositions]] from the beginning.
PSA 78:3 How great things have we heard, and we have known those [[or them]]; and our fathers told to us.
PSA 78:4 Those [[or They]] be not hid from the sons of them; in another generation. And they told the praisings of the Lord, and the virtues of him; and his marvels, which he did.
PSA 78:5 And he raised witnessing in Jacob; and he setted law in Israel. How great things commanded he to our fathers, to make those known to their sons;
PSA 78:6 that another generation know. Sons, that shall be born, and shall rise up; shall tell out to their sons.
PSA 78:7 That they set [[or put]] their hope in God, and forget not the works of God; and that they seek or search his commandments.
PSA 78:8 Lest they be made a shrewd generation; and stirring to wrath, as the fathers of them. A generation that dressed not his heart; and his spirit was not believed with God.
PSA 78:9 The sons of Ephraim, bending a bow, and sending arrows; were turned in the day of battle.
PSA 78:10 They kept not the testament of God; and they would not go in his law.
PSA 78:11 And they forgat his benificences [[or benefits]]; and his marvels, which he showed to them.
PSA 78:12 He did marvels before the fathers of them, in the land of Egypt; in the field of Tanis.
PSA 78:13 He brake the sea, and led them through it; and he ordained the waters as in a bouget [[or bottle]].
PSA 78:14 And he led them forth in a cloud of the day; and all night in the lightening of fire.
PSA 78:15 He brake a stone in desert; and he gave water to them as in a much depth.
PSA 78:16 And he led water out of the stone; and he led forth waters as floods.
PSA 78:17 And they putted yet to do sin against him; they excited the high God into ire, in a place without water.
PSA 78:18 And they tempted God in their hearts; that they asked meats to their lives.
PSA 78:19 And they spake evil of God; they said, Whether God may make ready a board in desert?
PSA 78:20 For he smote a stone, and waters flowed; and streams went out in abundance. Whether also he may give bread; either make ready a board to his people?
PSA 78:21 Therefore the Lord heard, and delayed; and fire was kindled in Jacob, and the ire of God ascended [[or went up]] on Israel.
PSA 78:22 For they believed not in God; neither hoped in his health.
PSA 78:23 And he commanded to the clouds above; and he opened the gates of heaven.
PSA 78:24 And he rained to them manna for to eat; and he gave to them bread of heaven.
PSA 78:25 Man ate the bread of angels; he sent to them meats in abundance.
PSA 78:26 He turned over the south wind from heaven; and he brought in by his virtue the west wind.
PSA 78:27 And he rained fleshes as dust on them; and also volatiles feathered, as the gravel of the sea.
PSA 78:28 And those felled in the midst of their castles [[or they fell in the middle of the tents of them]]; about the taber-nacles of them.
PSA 78:29 And they ate, and were filled greatly, and he brought their desire to them;
PSA 78:30 they were not defrauded of their desire. Yet their meats were in their mouth;
PSA 78:31 and the wrath of God ascended [[or went up]] on them. And he killed the fat men of them; and he hindered the chosen men of Israel.
PSA 78:32 In all these things they sinned yet; and believed not in the marvels of God.
PSA 78:33 And the days of them failed in vanity; and the years of them failed with haste.
PSA 78:34 When he killed them, they sought him; and they turned again, and early they came to him.
PSA 78:35 And they bethought, that God is the helper of them; and the high God is the again-buyer of them.
PSA 78:36 And they loved him in their mouth; and with their tongue they lied to him.
PSA 78:37 Forsooth the heart of them was not rightful [[or right]] with him; neither they were had faithful in his testament.
PSA 78:38 But he is merciful, and he shall be made merciful to the sins of them; and he shall not destroy them. And he did greatly, to turn away his ire; and he kindled not all his ire.
PSA 78:39 And he bethought, that they be flesh; a spirit going, and not turning again.
PSA 78:40 How oft made they him wroth in desert; they stirred him into ire in a place without water.
PSA 78:41 And they were turned, and tempted God; and they wrathed the Holy of Israel.
PSA 78:42 They bethought not on his hand; in the day in which he again-bought them from the hand of the troubler.
PSA 78:43 As he setted [[or put]] his signs in Egypt; and his great wonders in the field of Tanis.
PSA 78:44 And he turned the floods of them, and the rains of them, into blood; that they should not drink.
PSA 78:45 He sent a flesh fly [[or hound flea]] into them, and it ate them; and he sent a paddock [[or frog]], and it lost them.
PSA 78:46 And he gave the fruits of them to rust; and he gave the travails of them to locusts.
PSA 78:47 And he killed the vines of them with hail; and the sycamore trees of them with frost.
PSA 78:48 And he betook the beasts of them to hail; and the possessions of them to fire.
PSA 78:49 He sent into them the ire of his indignation; indignation, and ire, and tribulation, sendings-in by evil angels.
PSA 78:50 He made a way to the path of his ire, and he spared not from the death of their lives; and he enclosed alto-gether in death the beasts of them.
PSA 78:51 And he smote all the first engen-dered things [[or first begotten]] in the land of Egypt; the first fruits of all the travail of them in the tabernacles of Ham.
PSA 78:52 And he took away his people as sheep; and he led them forth as a flock in desert.
PSA 78:53 And he led them forth in hope, and they dreaded not; and the sea covered the enemies of them.
PSA 78:54 And he brought them into the hill of his hallowing; into the hill which his right hand gat.
PSA 78:55 And he casted out heathen men from the face of them; and by lot he parted to them the land in a cord of dealing. And he made the lineages of Israel to dwell in the tabernacles of them.
PSA 78:56 And they tempted, and wrathed the high God; and they kept not his witnessings.
PSA 78:57 And they turned away themselves, and they kept not covenant; as their fathers they were turned into a shrewd bow.
PSA 78:58 They stirred him into ire in their little hills; and they stirred him to indignation in their graven images.
PSA 78:59 God heard, and forsook; and brought to nought Israel greatly.
PSA 78:60 And he putted [[or put]] away the tabernacle of Shiloh; his tabernacle in which he dwelled among men.
PSA 78:61 And he betook the virtue of them into captivity; and the fairness of them into the hands of the enemy.
PSA 78:62 And he enclosed altogether his people in sword; and he despised his heritage.
PSA 78:63 Fire ate the young men of them; and the virgins of them were not bewailed or bewept.
PSA 78:64 The priests of them fell down by sword; and the widows of them were not bewept.
PSA 78:65 And the Lord was raised, as sleeping; as mighty greatly filled [[or drunk]] of wine.
PSA 78:66 And he smote his enemies on the hinder parts; he gave to them ever-lasting shame.
PSA 78:67 And he putted [[or put]] away the tabernacle of Joseph; and he chose not the lineage of Ephraim.
PSA 78:68 But he chose the lineage of Judah; he chose the hill of Zion, which he loved.
PSA 78:69 And he as an unicorn builded his holy place; in the land, which he founded into worlds.
PSA 78:70 And he chose David his servant, and took him up from the flocks of sheep;
PSA 78:71 he took him from behind sheep with lambs. To feed Jacob his servant; and Israel his heritage.
PSA 78:72 And he fed them in the inno-cence of his heart; and he led them forth in the understandings of his hands.
PSA 79:1 The psalm of Asaph. God, heathen men came into thine heritage; they defouled thine holy temple, they setted [[or put]] Jerusalem into the keeping of apples.
PSA 79:2 They setted [[or put]] the slain bodies of thy servants to be meats to the volatiles of heavens; the fleshes of thy saints to the beasts of the earth.
PSA 79:3 They shedded out the blood of them, as water in the compass of Jerusalem; and none there was that buried them.
PSA 79:4 We be made a shame to our neighbours; mocking and scorning to them, that be in our compass.
PSA 79:5 Lord, how long shalt thou be wroth into the end? shall thy vengeance be kindled as fire?
PSA 79:6 Pour out thine ire into heathen men, that know not thee; and into realms, that called not thy name.
PSA 79:7 For they ate Jacob; and made desolate his place.
PSA 79:8 Have thou not mind on our eld [[or old]] wickednesses; thy mercies before take us soon, for we be made poor greatly.
PSA 79:9 God, our health, help thou us, and, Lord, for the glory of thy name, deliver thou us; and be thou merciful to our sins, for thy name.
PSA 79:10 Lest peradventure they say among heathen men, Where is the God of them? and be he known among nations before our eyes. The vengeance of the blood of thy servants, which is shed [[or poured]] out;
PSA 79:11 the wailing of fettered men enter into thy sight. After the greatness of thine arm; wield thou the sons of slain men.
PSA 79:12 And yield thou to our neighbours sevenfold in the bosom of them; the shame of them, which they did shame-fully to thee, thou Lord.
PSA 79:13 But we that be thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture; shall acknowledge to thee into the world. In generation and into generation, we shall tell thy praising.
PSA 80:1 To victory; this psalm is the wit-nessing of Asaph for lilies. Thou that governest Israel, give attention; that leadest forth Joseph as a sheep. Thou that sittest on cherubim, be showed
PSA 80:2 before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh. Stir thy power, and come thou, that thou make us safe.
PSA 80:3 God of virtues, turn [[or convert]] thou us; and show thy face, and we shall be safe.
PSA 80:4 Lord God of virtues, how long shalt thou be wroth on the prayer of thy servants?
PSA 80:5 How long shalt thou feed us with the bread of tears; and shalt give drink to us with tears in great measure?
PSA 80:6 Thou hast set [[or put]] us into against-saying to our neighbours; and our enemies have scorned us.
PSA 80:7 God of virtues, turn [[or convert]] thou us; and show thy face, and we shall be safe.
PSA 80:8 Thou translatedest or brought over a vine from Egypt; thou castedest out heathen men, and plantedest it.
PSA 80:9 Thou were leader of the way in the sight thereof; and thou plantedest the roots thereof, and it filled the land.
PSA 80:10 The shadow thereof covered hills; and the branches thereof filled the cedars of God.
PSA 80:11 It stretched forth his scions till to the sea, and the generations thereof till to the flood.
PSA 80:12 Why hast thou destroyed the wall thereof; and all men that go forth by the way, gather away the grapes thereof?
PSA 80:13 A boar of the wood destroyed it; and a singular wild beast devoured it.
PSA 80:14 God of virtues, be thou turned again to us; behold from heaven, and see, and visit this vine.
PSA 80:15 And make thou it perfect, which thy right hand planted; and behold thou on the son of man, which thou hast confirmed to thee.
PSA 80:16 Things were burnt with fire, and undermined; they who did this shall perish for the blaming of thy cheer.
PSA 80:17 Thine hand be made on the man of thy right hand; and on the son of man, whom thou hast confirmed to thee.
PSA 80:18 And we departed not from thee; thou shalt quicken us, and we shall inwardly call thy name.
PSA 80:19 Lord God of virtues, turn thou us; and show thy face, and we shall be safe.
PSA 81:1 To the overcomer, on the pressers[[or wine presses]], [[the psalm]]of Asaph. Make ye fully joy [[or Full out joyeth]] to God, our helper; sing ye heartily to God of Jacob.
PSA 81:2 Take ye a psalm, and give ye a tympan; a merry psaltery with an harp.
PSA 81:3 Blow ye with a trump in the new moon; in the noble day of your solemnity.
PSA 81:4 For why commandment is in Israel; and doom is to God of Jacob.
PSA 81:5 He setted [[or put]] that witnessing in Joseph; when he went out of the land of Egypt, he heard a language, that he knew not.
PSA 81:6 He turned away his back from burdens; his hands served in a coffin.
PSA 81:7 In tribulation thou inwardly called-est me, and I delivered thee; I heard thee in the hid place of tempest, I proved thee at the waters of against-saying.
PSA 81:8 My people, hear thou me, and I shall be witness against thee; Israel, if thou hearest me,
PSA 81:9 a fresh God shall not be in thee; and thou shalt not worship an alien god.
PSA 81:10 For I am thy Lord God, that led thee out of the land of Egypt; make large thy mouth, and I shall fill it.
PSA 81:11 And my people heard not my voice; and Israel gave not attention to me.
PSA 81:12 And I let them go after the desires of their heart; they shall go in their findings.
PSA 81:13 If my people had heard me; if Israel had gone in my ways.
PSA 81:14 For not in hap I had made low their enemies; and I had sent mine hand on men doing tribulation to them.
PSA 81:15 The enemies of the Lord lied or lay down to him; and their time shall be into worlds.
PSA 81:16 And he fed them with the fatness of wheat; and he [[ful]] filled them with honey of the stone.
PSA 82:1 The psalm of Asaph. God stood in the synagogue of gods; forsooth he deemeth gods in the middle.
PSA 82:2 How long deem ye with wicked-ness; and take the faces of sinners?
PSA 82:3 Deem ye to the needy man, and to the motherless child; justify ye the meek man and poor.
PSA 82:4 Ravish ye out a poor man; and deliver ye a needy man from the hand of the sinner.
PSA 82:5 They know not, neither under-stand, they go in darknesses; all the foundaments of [[the]] earth shall be moved.
PSA 82:6 I said, Ye be gods; and all ye be the sons of the high God.
PSA 82:7 But ye shall die as men; and ye shall fall down as one of the princes.
PSA 82:8 Rise, thou God, deem thou the earth; for thou shalt have heritage in all folks.
PSA 83:1 The song of the psalm of Asaph. God, who shall be like thee? God, be thou not still, neither be thou peaced.
PSA 83:2 For lo! thine enemies sounded; and they that hate thee raised the head.
PSA 83:3 They made a wicked counsel on thy people; and they thought against thy saints.
PSA 83:4 They said, Come ye, and lose we them from the folk; and the name of Israel be no more had in mind.
PSA 83:5 For they thought with one accord;
PSA 83:6 the tabernacles of Idumeans, and men of Ishmael disposed a testament together against thee. Moab, and Hag-arenes,
PSA 83:7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; and the aliens with them that dwell in Tyre.
PSA 83:8 For Assur cometh with them; they be made into help to the sons of Lot.
PSA 83:9 Make thou to them as to Midian, and Sisera; as to Jabin, in the strand [[or stream]] of Kishon.
PSA 83:10 They perished in Endor; they were made as a turd of earth.
PSA 83:11 Put thou the princes of them as Oreb and Zeeb; and Zebah and Zalmunna.
PSA 83:12 All the princes of them, that said, Hold we by heritage the saintuary of God.
PSA 83:13 My God, put thou them as a wheel; and as stubble before the face of the wind.
PSA 83:14 As fire that burneth a wood; and as flame burning hills.
PSA 83:15 So thou shalt pursue them in thy tempest; and thou shalt trouble them in thine ire.
PSA 83:16 Lord, fill thou the faces of them with shame; and they shall seek thy name.
PSA 83:17 Be they ashamed, and be they troubled into the world of world; and be they shamed, and perish they.
PSA 83:18 And know they, that Lord is name to thee; thou alone art the Highest in every land.
PSA 84:1 To victory, on the pressers[[or wine presses]]. The psalm of the sons of Korah. Lord of virtues, thy taber-nacles be greatly loved;
PSA 84:2 my soul coveteth, and faileth into the porches of the Lord. Mine heart, and my flesh; full out joyed into quick God [[or God alive]].
PSA 84:3 For why a sparrow findeth an house to itself; and a turtle findeth a nest to itself, where it shall keep his birds. Lord of virtues, thine altars; my king, and my God.
PSA 84:4 Lord, blessed be they that dwell in thine house; they shall praise thee into the worlds of worlds.
PSA 84:5 Blessed is the man, whose help is of thee; he hath ordained thy goings in his heart,
PSA 84:6 in the valley of tears, in the place which he hath set. For the giver of the law shall give blessing,
PSA 84:7 they shall go from virtue into virtue to strength; God of gods shall be seen in Zion.
PSA 84:8 Lord God of virtues, hear thou my prayer; God of Jacob, perceive thou with ears.
PSA 84:9 God, our defender, behold thou; and behold into the face of thy christ or thine anointed.
PSA 84:10 For why one day in thine halls is better; than a thousand elsewhere. I choose to be abject, either an outcast, in the house of my God; more than to dwell in the tabernacles of sinners.
PSA 84:11 For God loveth mercy and truth; the Lord shall give grace and glory. He shall not deprive them from goods, that go in innocence;
PSA 84:12 Lord of virtues, blessed is the man, that hopeth in thee.
PSA 85:1 To the overcomer, the song of the sons of Korah. Lord, thou hast blessed thy land; thou hast turned away the captivity of Jacob.
PSA 85:2 Thou hast forgiven the wicked-ness of thy people; thou hast covered all the sins of them.
PSA 85:3 Thou hast assuaged all thine ire; thou hast turned away from the ire of thine indignation.
PSA 85:4 God, our health, convert thou us; and turn away thine ire from us.
PSA 85:5 Whether thou shalt be wroth to us without end; either shalt thou hold forth thine ire from generation into generation?
PSA 85:6 God, thou converted, shalt quicken us; and thy people shall be glad in thee.
PSA 85:7 Lord, show thy mercy to us; and give thine health to us.
PSA 85:8 I shall hear what the Lord God shall speak in me; for he shall speak peace to his people. And on his holy men; and on them that be turned to heart.
PSA 85:9 Nevertheless his health is nigh men dreading him; that glory dwell in our land.
PSA 85:10 Mercy and truth met themselves; rightwiseness and peace were kissed.
PSA 85:11 Truth came forth of the earth; and rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] beheld from heaven.
PSA 85:12 For the Lord shall give benignity; and our earth shall give his fruit.
PSA 85:13 Rightfulness [[or Rightwiseness]] shall go before him; and shall set his steps in the way.
PSA 86:1 The prayer of David. Lord, bow down thine ear, and hear me; for I am needy and poor.
PSA 86:2 Keep thou my life, for I am holy; my God, make thou safe thy servant hoping in thee.
PSA 86:3 Lord, have thou mercy on me, for I cried all day to thee;
PSA 86:4 make thou glad the soul of thy servant; for why, Lord, I have raised my soul to thee.
PSA 86:5 For thou, Lord, art sweet and mild; and of much mercy to all men inwardly calling thee.
PSA 86:6 Lord, perceive thou my prayer with ears; and give thou attention to the voice of my beseeching.
PSA 86:7 In the day of my tribulation I cried to thee; for thou heardest me.
PSA 86:8 Lord, none among gods is like thee; and none is even to thy works.
PSA 86:9 Lord, all folks, whichever thou madest, shall come, and worship before thee; and they shall glorify thy name.
PSA 86:10 For thou art full great, and making marvels; thou art God alone.
PSA 86:11 Lord, lead thou me forth in thy way, and I shall enter in thy truth; mine heart be glad, that it dread thy name.
PSA 86:12 My Lord God, I shall acknowledge to thee in all mine heart; and I shall glorify thy name without end.
PSA 86:13 For thy mercy is great on me; and thou deliveredest my soul from the lower hell.
PSA 86:14 God, wicked men have risen upon me; and the synagogue of mighty men have sought my life; and they have not set forth thee in their sight.
PSA 86:15 And thou, Lord God, doing mercy, and merciful; patient, and of much mercy, and soothfast.
PSA 86:16 Behold on me, and have mercy on me, give thou the empire to thy servant; and make thou safe the son of thine handmaid.
PSA 86:17 Make thou with me a sign in good, that they see, that hate me, and be ashamed; for thou, Lord, hast helped or holpen me, and hast comforted me.
PSA 87:1 The psalm of the song of the sons of Korah. The foundaments thereof be in holy hills;
PSA 87:2 the Lord loveth the gates of Zion, more than all the tabernacles of Jacob.
PSA 87:3 Thou city of God, without end; glorious things be said of thee.
PSA 87:4 I shall be mindful of Rahab, and Babylon; knowing me. Lo! aliens, and Tyre, and the people of Ethiopians; they were there.
PSA 87:5 Whether a man shall say to Zion, And a man is born therein; and that man, alder Highest, founded it?
PSA 87:6 The Lord shall tell in the scriptures of these peoples; and of these princes, that were therein.
PSA 87:7 As the dwelling of all that be glad; is in thee.
PSA 88:1 The song of the psalm, to the sons of Korah, to victory on Mahalath, for to answer the learning of Heman the Ezrahite. Lord God of mine health; I cried in day and night before thee.
PSA 88:2 My prayer enter before thy sight; bow down thine ear to my prayer.
PSA 88:3 For my soul is [[full-]]filled with evils; and my life nighed to hell.
PSA 88:4 I am guessed with them that go down into the pit; I am made as a man without help,
PSA 88:5 and free among dead men. As men wounded sleeping in sepulchres, of which men none thou is mindful of after; and they be put away from thine hand.
PSA 88:6 They have put me in the lower pit; in dark places, and in the shadow of death.
PSA 88:7 Thy strong vengeance is confirmed on me; and thou hast brought in all thy waves on me.
PSA 88:8 Thou hast made far from me my known; they have set [[or put]] me abom-ination to themselves. I am taken in, and I went not out;
PSA 88:9 mine eyes were sick [[or enfeebled]] for poverty. Lord, I cried to thee; all day I spreaded abroad mine hands to thee.
PSA 88:10 Whether thou shalt do marvels to dead men; either leeches shall raise them up, and they shall acknowledge to thee?
PSA 88:11 Whether any man in sepulchre shall tell thy mercy; and thy truth in perdition?
PSA 88:12 Whether thy marvels shall be known in darknesses; and thy right-fulness [[or rightwiseness]] in the land of forgetting?
PSA 88:13 And, Lord, I cried to thee; and early my prayer shall before come to thee.
PSA 88:14 Lord, why puttest thou away my prayer; thou turnest away thy face from me?
PSA 88:15 I am poor, and in travails from my youth; soothly I am enhanced, and I am made low, and troubled.
PSA 88:16 Thy wraths passed on me; and thy dreads troubled me.
PSA 88:17 They encompassed me as water all day; they encompassed me altogether.
PSA 88:18 Thou madest far from me a friend and neighbour; and my known from wretchedness.
PSA 89:1 The learning of Ethan the Ezrahite. I shall sing without end; the mercies of the Lord. In generation and into generation; I shall tell thy truth with my mouth.
PSA 89:2 For thou saidest, Without end mercy shall be builded in heavens; thy truth shall be made ready in those [[or them]].
PSA 89:3 Thou saidest, I disposed a testa-ment to my chosen men; I swore to David, my servant,
PSA 89:4 till into without end I shall make ready thy seed. And I shall build thy seat; in generation, and into generation.
PSA 89:5 Lord, heavens shall acknowledge thy marvels; and thy truth in the church of saints.
PSA 89:6 For who in the clouds shall be made even to the Lord; shall be like God among the sons of God?
PSA 89:7 God, that is glorified in the council of saints; is great, and dreadful over all that be in his compass.
PSA 89:8 Lord God of virtues, who is like thee? Lord, thou art mighty, and thy truth is in thy compass.
PSA 89:9 Thou art Lord of the power of the sea; forsooth thou assuagest the stirring of the waves thereof.
PSA 89:10 Thou madest low the proud, as wounded; in the arm of thy strength thou hast scattered thine enemies.
PSA 89:11 Heavens be thine, and the earth is thine; thou hast founded the world, and the fullness thereof;
PSA 89:12 thou madest of nought the north and the sea. Tabor and Hermon shall make full out joy in thy name;
PSA 89:13 thine arm with power. Thine hand be made steadfast, and thy right hand be enhanced;
PSA 89:14 rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] and doom is the making ready of thy seat. Mercy and truth shall go before thy face;
PSA 89:15 blessed is the people that know a hearty song. Lord, they shall go in the light of thy cheer;
PSA 89:16 and in thy name they shall make full out joy all day; and they shall be enhanced in thy rightfulness [[or right-wiseness]].
PSA 89:17 For thou art the glory of the virtue of them; and in thy good pleasance our horn shall be enhanced.
PSA 89:18 For our taking up is of the Lord; and of the Holy of Israel our king.
PSA 89:19 Then thou spakest in revelation to thy saints, and saidest, I have set [[or put]] help in the mighty; and I have enhanced the chosen man of my people.
PSA 89:20 I found David, my servant; I anointed him with mine holy oil.
PSA 89:21 For mine hand shall help him; and mine arm shall confirm him.
PSA 89:22 The enemy shall nothing profit in him; and the son of wickedness shall not lay to or put to, for to annoy him.
PSA 89:23 And I shall slay his enemies from his face; and I shall turn into flight them that hate him.
PSA 89:24 And my truth and mercy shall be with him; and his horn shall be enhanced in my name.
PSA 89:25 And I shall set [[or put]] his hand in the sea; and his right hand in floods.
PSA 89:26 He shall inwardly call me, Thou art my father; my God, and the up-taker of mine health.
PSA 89:27 And I shall set him the first be-gotten son; higher than the kings of earth.
PSA 89:28 Without end I shall keep my mercy to him; and my testament faithful to him.
PSA 89:29 And I shall set his seed into the world of world; and his throne as the days of heaven.
PSA 89:30 Forsooth if his sons forsake my law; and go not in my dooms.
PSA 89:31 If they make unholy my rightful-nesses; and keep not my command-ments.
PSA 89:32 I shall visit in a rod the wicked-nesses of them; and in beatings the sins of them.
PSA 89:33 But I shall not scatter my mercy from him; and in my truth I shall not annoy him.
PSA 89:34 Neither I shall make unholy my testament; and I shall not make void those things that come forth of my lips.
PSA 89:35 Once I swore in mine holiness, I shall not lie to David;
PSA 89:36 his seed shall dwell without end. And his throne as [[the]] sun in my sight,
PSA 89:37 and as a perfect moon without end; and a faithful witness in heaven.
PSA 89:38 But thou hast put away, and despised; and hast delayed thy christ.
PSA 89:39 Thou hast turned away the testa-ment of thy servant; thou madest unholy his saintuary in earth.
PSA 89:40 Thou destroyedest all the hedges thereof; thou hast set the steadfastness thereof into dread.
PSA 89:41 All men passing by the way ravished him; he is made a shame to his neighbours.
PSA 89:42 Thou hast enhanced the right hand of men oppressing him; thou hast gladdened all his enemies.
PSA 89:43 Thou hast turned away the help of his sword; and thou helpedest not him in battle.
PSA 89:44 Thou destroyedest him from cleansing; and thou hast hurled down his seat in [[the]] earth.
PSA 89:45 Thou hast made less the days of his time; thou hast beshed him with shame.
PSA 89:46 Lord, how long turnest thou away, into the end; shall thine ire burn out as fire?
PSA 89:47 Bethink thou what is my substance; for whether thou hast ordained vainly all the sons of men?
PSA 89:48 Who is a man, that shall live, and shall not see death; shall he deliver his soul from the hand of hell?
PSA 89:49 Lord, where be thine eld [[or old]] mercies; as thou hast sworn to David in thy truth?
PSA 89:50 Lord, be thou mindful of the shame of thy servants; of the insults of many heathen men, which I held together in my bosom.
PSA 89:51 Which thine enemies, Lord, did shamefully; for they despised the changing of thy christ.
PSA 89:52 Blessed be the Lord without end; be it done, be it done.
PSA 90:1 The prayer of Moses, the man of God. Lord, thou art made help to us; from generation into generation.
PSA 90:2 Before that hills were made, either the earth and the world was formed; from the world and into the world, thou art God.
PSA 90:3 Turn thou not away a man into lowness; and thou saidest, Ye sons of men, be turned again.
PSA 90:4 For a thousand years be before thine eyes; as yesterday, which is passed, and as [[the]] keeping in the night.
PSA 90:5 The years of them shall be; that be had for nought. Early pass he, as an herb,
PSA 90:6 early flourish he, and pass; in the eventide fall he down, be he hard, and wax he dry.
PSA 90:7 For we have failed in thine ire; and we be troubled in thy strong vengeance.
PSA 90:8 Thou hast set [[or put]] our wicked-nesses in thy sight; our world in the lightening of thy cheer.
PSA 90:9 For all our days have failed; and we have failed in thine ire. Our years we shall bethink upon as a spider;
PSA 90:10 the days of our years be those seventy years. Forsooth, if fourscore or eighty years be in mighty men; and the more time of them is travail and sorrow. For mildness came above; and we shall be chastised.
PSA 90:11 Who knew the power of thine ire; and durst number thine ire for thy dread?
PSA 90:12 Make thy right hand so known; and make men learned in heart by wisdom.
PSA 90:13 Lord, be thou converted some-deal; and be thou able to be prayed of by thy servants.
PSA 90:14 We were [[ful]] filled early with thy mercy; we made full out joy, and we delighted in all our days.
PSA 90:15 We were glad for the days in which thou madest us meek; for the years in which we saw evils.
PSA 90:16 Lord, behold thou into thy servants, and into thy works; and dress thou the sons of them.
PSA 90:17 And the shining of our Lord God be on us; and dress thou the works of our hands on us; and dress thou the works of our hands.
PSA 91:1 He that dwelleth in the help of the highest God; shall dwell in the protection of God of heaven.
PSA 91:2 He shall say to the Lord, Thou art mine up-taker, and my refuge; my God, I shall hope in him.
PSA 91:3 For he delivered me from the snare of hunters; and from a sharp word.
PSA 91:4 With his shoulders he shall make shadow to thee; and thou shalt have hope under his feathers. His truth shall encompass thee with a shield;
PSA 91:5 thou shalt not dread of the night’s dread. Of an arrow flying in the day,
PSA 91:6 of a goblin going in darknesses; of assailing, and of a midday fiend.
PSA 91:7 A thousand shall fall down from thy side, and ten thousand from thy right side; forsooth it shall not nigh to thee.
PSA 91:8 Nevertheless thou shalt behold with thine eyes; and thou shalt see the yielding of sinners.
PSA 91:9 For thou, Lord, art mine hope; thou hast set thine help to be the alder Highest.
PSA 91:10 Evil shall not come to thee; and a scourge shall not come nigh to thy tabernacle.
PSA 91:11 For God hath commanded to his angels of thee; that they keep thee in all thy ways.
PSA 91:12 They shall bear thee in the hands; lest peradventure thou hurt thy foot at a stone.
PSA 91:13 Thou shalt go upon a snake, and a cockatrice; and thou shalt defoul a lion, and a dragon.
PSA 91:14 For God saith, For he hoped in me, I shall deliver him; I shall defend him, for he knew my name.
PSA 91:15 He cried to me, and I shall hear him; I am with him in tribulation; I shall deliver him, and I shall glorify him.
PSA 91:16 I shall [[ful]] fill him with the length of days; and I shall show mine health to him.
PSA 92:1 The psalm of song, in the day of sabbath. It is good to acknowledge to the Lord; and to sing to thy name, thou Highest.
PSA 92:2 To show early thy mercy; and thy truth by night.
PSA 92:3 In a psaltery of ten cords; with song in harp.
PSA 92:4 For thou, Lord, hast delighted me in the works of thy making; and I shall make full out joy in the works of thine hands.
PSA 92:5 Lord, thy works be magnified greatly; thy thoughts be made full deep.
PSA 92:6 An unwise man shall not know; and a fool shall not understand these things.
PSA 92:7 When sinners come forth, as hay; and all they appear, that work wicked-ness. That they perish into the world of world;
PSA 92:8 forsooth thou, Lord, art the Highest, without end.
PSA 92:9 For lo! Lord, thine enemies, for lo! thine enemies shall perish; and all they shall be scattered that work wickedness.
PSA 92:10 And mine horn shall be raised as an unicorn; and mine eld age shall be in plenteous mercy.
PSA 92:11 And mine eye despised mine enemies; and when wicked men rise against me, mine ear shall hear of their downfall.
PSA 92:12 A just [[or rightwise]] man shall flower as a palm tree; he shall be multiplied as a cedar of Lebanon.
PSA 92:13 Men planted in the house of the Lord; shall flower in the porches of the house of our God.
PSA 92:14 Yet they shall be multiplied in plenteous eld age; and they shall be suffering well.
PSA 92:15 That they tell, that our Lord God is rightful [[or right]]; and no wicked-ness is in him.
PSA 93:1 The Lord hath reigned, he is clothed with fairness; the Lord is clothed with strength, and hath girded himself. For he made steadfast the world; that shall not be moved.
PSA 93:2 God, thy seat was made ready from that time; thou art from the world.
PSA 93:3 Lord, the floods have raised; the floods have raised their voice. Floods have raised their waves; of the voices of many waters.
PSA 93:4 The raisings of the sea be wonder-ful; the Lord is wonderful in high things.
PSA 93:5 Thy witnessings be made able to be believed greatly; Lord, holiness be-cometh thine house, into the length of days.
PSA 94:1 God is Lord of vengeances; God of vengeance did freely.
PSA 94:2 Be thou enhanced that deemest the earth; yield thou yielding to proud men.
PSA 94:3 Lord, how long sinners; how long shall sinners have glory?
PSA 94:4 They shall tell out, and shall speak wickedness; all men shall speak that work unrightfulness.
PSA 94:5 Lord, they have made low thy people; and they have dis-eased thine heritage.
PSA 94:6 They killed a widow and a come-ling; and they have slain fatherless children and motherless.
PSA 94:7 And they said, The Lord shall not see it; and, God of Jacob shall not understand.
PSA 94:8 Ye unwise men in the people, understand; and, ye fools, learn some-time.
PSA 94:9 Shall not he hear, that planted the ear; either beholdeth not he, that made the eye?
PSA 94:10 Shall not he reprove, that chastiseth folks; shall he not know, which teacheth man knowing?
PSA 94:11 The Lord knoweth the thoughts of men; that those [[or they]] be vain.
PSA 94:12 Blessed is the man, whom thou, Lord, hast learned; and hast taught him of thy law.
PSA 94:13 That thou assuage him from evil days; till a ditch be digged to the sinner.
PSA 94:14 For the Lord shall not put away his people; and he shall not forsake his heritage.
PSA 94:15 Till rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] be turned into doom; and who be nigh it, all that be of rightful heart.
PSA 94:16 Who shall rise with me against mis-doers; either who shall stand with me against them that work wickedness?
PSA 94:17 No but for the Lord helped me; almost my soul had dwelled in hell.
PSA 94:18 If I said, My foot was stirred; Lord, thy mercy helped me.
PSA 94:19 After the multitude of my sorrows in mine heart; thy comforts made glad my soul.
PSA 94:20 Whether the seat of wickedness cleaveth to thee; that makest travail in commandment?
PSA 94:21 They shall take hold against the soul of a just [[or rightwise]] man; and they shall condemn innocent blood.
PSA 94:22 And the Lord was made to me into refuge; and my God was made into the help of mine hope.
PSA 94:23 And he shall yield to them the wickedness of them; and in the malice of them he shall lose them, our Lord God shall lose them.
PSA 95:1 Come ye, make ye full out joy to the Lord; heartily sing we to God, our health.
PSA 95:2 Before-occupy we his face in acknowledging; and heartily sing we to him in psalms.
PSA 95:3 For God is a great Lord, and a great King above all gods; for the Lord shall not put away his people.
PSA 95:4 For all the ends of [[the]] earth be in his hand; and the highness, [[or the heights]], of hills be his.
PSA 95:5 For the sea is his, and he made it; and his hands formed the dry land.
PSA 95:6 Come ye, praise we, and fall we down before God; weep we before the Lord that made us;
PSA 95:7 for he is our Lord God. And we be the people of his pasture; and the sheep of his hand. If ye have heard his voice today;
PSA 95:8 do not ye make hard your hearts. As in the stirring to wrath; by the day of temptation in desert.
PSA 95:9 Where your fathers tempted me; they proved and saw my works.
PSA 95:10 Forty years I was offended to this generation; and I said, Ever[[more]] they err in heart. And these men knew not my ways;
PSA 95:11 to whom I swore in mine ire, they shall not enter into my rest.
PSA 96:1 Sing ye a new song to the Lord; all earth, sing ye to the Lord.
PSA 96:2 Sing ye to the Lord, and bless ye his name; tell ye his health from day into day.
PSA 96:3 Tell ye his glory among heathen men; his marvels among all peoples.
PSA 96:4 For the Lord is great, and worthy to be praised full much; he is feared-ful above all gods.
PSA 96:5 For all the gods of heathen men be fiends; but the Lord made heavens.
PSA 96:6 Acknowledging and fairness is in his sight; holiness and worthy doing is in his hallowing.
PSA 96:7 Ye countries of heathen men, bring to the Lord, bring ye glory and honour to the Lord;
PSA 96:8 bring ye to the Lord glory to his name. Take ye sacrifices, and enter ye into the halls of him;
PSA 96:9 praise ye the Lord in his holy hall. All earth be moved of his face;
PSA 96:10 say ye among heathen men, that the Lord hath reigned. And he hath amended the world, that shall not be moved; he shall deem peoples in equity.
PSA 96:11 Heavens be glad, and the earth make full out joy, the sea and the fullness thereof be moved altogether;
PSA 96:12 fields shall make joy, and all things that be in those [[or them]]. Then all the trees of woods shall make full out joy,
PSA 96:13 for the face of the Lord, for he cometh; for he cometh to deem the earth. He shall deem the world in equity; and peoples in his truth.
PSA 97:1 The Lord hath reigned, the earth make full out joy; many isles be glad.
PSA 97:2 Cloud and darkness in his compass; rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] and doom is[[the]] amending [[or correction]] of his seat.
PSA 97:3 Fire shall go before him; and shall enflame, either set afire, his enemies in compass.
PSA 97:4 His lightnings shined to the world; the earth saw, and was moved.
PSA 97:5 Hills as wax floated [[or flowed]] down from the face of the Lord; all earth from the face of the Lord.
PSA 97:6 Heavens told his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and all peoples saw his glory.
PSA 97:7 All they that worship graven things, or images, be shamed, and they that have glory in their simu-lacra; all ye angels of the Lord, worship him.
PSA 97:8 Zion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah made full out joy, for thy dooms, Lord.
PSA 97:9 For thou, Lord, art the highest on all earth; thou art greatly enhanced over all gods.
PSA 97:10 Ye that love the Lord, hate evil; the Lord keepeth the souls of his saints; he shall deliver them from the hand of the sinner.
PSA 97:11 Light is risen to the rightful [[or rightwise]] man; and gladness to rightful men of heart.
PSA 97:12 Just [[or rightwise]] men, be ye glad in the Lord; and acknowledge ye to the mind of his hallowing.
PSA 98:1 A psalm. Sing ye a new song to the Lord; for he hath done marvels. His right hand and his holy arm; hath made health to him.
PSA 98:2 The Lord hath made known his health; in the sight of heathen men he hath showed his rightfulness [[or right-wiseness]].
PSA 98:3 He bethought on his mercy; and on his truth, to the house of Israel. All the ends of earth; saw the health of our God.
PSA 98:4 All earth, make ye heartily joy to God; sing ye, and make ye full out joy, and say ye psalm.
PSA 98:5 Sing ye to the Lord in an harp, in harp and in voice of psalm;
PSA 98:6 in trumps beaten out with hammer, and in voice of a trump of horn. Heartily sing ye in the sight of the Lord, the King;
PSA 98:7 the sea and the fullness thereof be moved; the world, and they that dwell therein.
PSA 98:8 Floods shall make joy with hand; together hills shall make full out joy,
PSA 98:9 for the sight of the Lord; for he cometh to deem the earth. He shall deem the world in rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and peoples in equity.
PSA 99:1 The Lord hath reigned, [[the]] peoples be wroth; thou that sittest on cherubim, the earth be moved.
PSA 99:2 The Lord is great in Zion; and high above all peoples.
PSA 99:3 Acknowledge they to thy great name, for it is fearedful and holy;
PSA 99:4 and the honour of the king loveth doom. Thou hast made ready dress-ings [[or rightforth rulings]]; thou hast made doom and rightfulness [[or right-wiseness]] in Jacob.
PSA 99:5 Enhance ye our Lord God; and worship ye at the stool of his feet, for it is holy.
PSA 99:6 Moses and Aaron were among his priests; and Samuel was among them that inwardly call his name. They inwardly called the Lord, and he heard them;
PSA 99:7 in a pillar of cloud he spake to them. They kept his witnessings; and the commandment which he gave to them.
PSA 99:8 Our Lord God, thou heardest them; God, thou were merciful to them, and thou tookest vengeance on all their findings.
PSA 99:9 Enhance ye our Lord God, and worship ye in his holy hill; for our Lord God is holy.
PSA 100:1 A psalm to acknowledge. All earth, sing ye heartily to God;
PSA 100:2 serve ye the Lord in gladness. Enter ye in his sight in full out joying.
PSA 100:3 Know ye, that the Lord himself is God; he made us, and not we made us. His people, and the sheep of his pasture,
PSA 100:4 enter ye into his gates in acknowl-edging; enter ye into his porches, acknowledge ye to him in hymns. Praise ye his name,
PSA 100:5 for the Lord is sweet, his mercy is without end; and his truth is in generation and into generation.
PSA 101:1 The psalm of David. Lord, I shall sing to thee; mercy and doom. I shall sing,
PSA 101:2 and I shall understand in a way without wem; when thou shalt come to me. I went perfectly in the inno-cence of mine heart; in the middle of mine house.
PSA 101:3 I setted not forth before mine eyes an unjust thing; I hated them that made trespassings.
PSA 101:4 A shrewd heart cleaved not to me; I knew not a wicked man bowing away from me.
PSA 101:5 I pursued him that backbited privily his neighbour. With the proud eye and an heart unable to be filled; I ate not with this.
PSA 101:6 Mine eyes were to the faithful men of earth, that they sit with me; he that went in a way without wem, ministered [[or served]] to me.
PSA 101:7 He that doeth pride, shall not dwell in the middle of mine house; he that speaketh wicked things, served not in the sight of mine eyes.
PSA 101:8 In the morrowtide I killed all the sinners of earth; that I should lose from the city of the Lord all men working wickedness.
PSA 102:1 The prayer of a poor man, when he was anguished, and shedded out his speech before the Lord. Lord, hear thou my prayer; and my cry come to thee.
PSA 102:2 Turn not away thy face from me; in whatever day I am troubled, bow down thine ear to me. In whatever day I shall inwardly call thee; hear thou me swiftly.
PSA 102:3 For my days have failed as smoke; and my bones have dried up as croutons or cracklings, either leavings of frying.
PSA 102:4 I am smitten as hay, and mine heart dried up; for I have forgotten to eat my bread.
PSA 102:5 Of the voice of my wailing; my bone cleaved to my flesh.
PSA 102:6 I am made like a pelican of wilderness; I am made as a night crow in an house.
PSA 102:7 I waked; and I am made as a solitary sparrow in the roof.
PSA 102:8 All day mine enemies despised me; and they that praised me swore against me.
PSA 102:9 For I ate ashes as bread; and I meddled [[or mingled]] my drink with weeping.
PSA 102:10 From the face of the ire of thine indignation; for thou raising me [[up]] hast hurtled me down.
PSA 102:11 My days bowed away as a shadow; and I waxed dry as hay.
PSA 102:12 But, Lord, thou dwellest without end; and thy memorial in generation and into generation.
PSA 102:13 Lord, thou rising up, shalt have mercy on Zion; for the time to have mercy thereof cometh, for the time cometh.
PSA 102:14 For the stones thereof pleased thy servants; and they shall have mercy on the land thereof.
PSA 102:15 And, Lord, heathen men shall dread thy name; and all kings of earth shall dread thy glory.
PSA 102:16 For the Lord hath built [[up]] Zion; and he shall be seen in his glory.
PSA 102:17 He beheld on the prayer of meek men; and he despised not the prayer of them.
PSA 102:18 Be these things written in another generation; and the people that shall be made shall praise the Lord.
PSA 102:19 For he beheld from his high holy place; the Lord looked from heaven into earth.
PSA 102:20 For to hear the wailings of fettered men; and for to unbind the sons of slain men.
PSA 102:21 That they tell in Zion the name of the Lord; and his praising in Jerusalem.
PSA 102:22 In gathering together peoples into one; and kings, that they serve the Lord.
PSA 102:23 It answered to him in the way of his virtue; Tell thou to me the few-ness of my days.
PSA 102:24 Again-call thou not me in the middle of my days; thy years be in generation and into generation.
PSA 102:25 Lord, thou foundedest the earth in the beginning; and heavens be the works of thine hands.
PSA 102:26 Those shall perish, but thou dwellest perfectly; and all shall wax eld [[or old]] as a cloth. And thou shalt change them as a covering, and those shall be changed;
PSA 102:27 but thou art the same thyself, and thy years shall not fail.
PSA 102:28 The sons of thy servants shall dwell; and the seed of them shall be dressed into the world.
PSA 103:1 A psalm of David. My soul, bless thou the Lord, and all things that be within me, bless his holy name.
PSA 103:2 My soul, bless thou the Lord; and do not thou forget all the yieldings of him.
PSA 103:3 Which doeth mercy to all thy wickednesses; which healeth all thy sicknesses.
PSA 103:4 Which again-buyeth thy life from death; which crowneth thee in mercy and merciful doings.
PSA 103:5 Which [[ful]] filleth thy desire in goods; thy youth shall be renewed as the youth of an eagle.
PSA 103:6 The Lord doing mercies; and doom, to all men suffering wrong.
PSA 103:7 He made his ways known to Moses; his wills or deeds to the sons of Israel.
PSA 103:8 The Lord is a merciful doer, and merciful in will; long abiding, and much merciful.
PSA 103:9 He shall not be wroth without end; and he shall not threaten without end.
PSA 103:10 He did not to us after our sins; neither he yielded to us after our wickednesses.
PSA 103:11 For by the highness of heaven from earth; he made strong his mercy on men dreading him.
PSA 103:12 As much as the east is from the west; he made [[a]] far our wicked-nesses from us.
PSA 103:13 As a father hath mercy on his sons, the Lord had mercy on men dreading him;
PSA 103:14 for he knew our making. He bethought that we be dust,
PSA 103:15 a man is as hay; his day[[s]] shall flower out so as a flower of the field.
PSA 103:16 For the spirit shall pass in him, and it shall not abide; and it shall no more know his place.
PSA 103:17 But the mercy of the Lord is from without beginning, and till into with-out end; on men dreading him. And his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]is into the sons of sons;
PSA 103:18 to them that keep his testament. And be mindful of his command-ments; to do those [[or them]].
PSA 103:19 The Lord hath made ready his seat in heaven; and his realm shall be lord of all.
PSA 103:20 Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; ye mighty in virtue, doing his word, to hear the voice of his words.
PSA 103:21 All virtues or hosts of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; ye ministers of him, that do his will.
PSA 103:22 All works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, in each place of his lord-ship; my soul, bless thou the Lord.
PSA 104:1 My soul, bless thou the Lord; my Lord God, thou art magnified greatly. Thou hast clothed acknowledging and fairness;
PSA 104:2 and thou art clothed with light, as with a cloth. And thou stretchest forth heaven as a skin;
PSA 104:3 and thou coverest with waters the higher parts thereof. Which settest a cloud thy ascending; which goest on the feathers of winds.
PSA 104:4 Which makest spirits thine angels; and thy ministers a burning fire.
PSA 104:5 Which hast founded the earth on his stableness; it shall not be bowed into the world of world.
PSA 104:6 The depth of waters as a cloth is the clothing thereof; waters shall stand on hills.
PSA 104:7 Those [[or they]] shall flee from thy blaming; men shall be afeared of the voice of thy thunder.
PSA 104:8 Hills go up, and fields go down; into the place which thou hast founded to those [[or them]].
PSA 104:9 Thou hast set a term, which they shall not pass; neither those [[or they]] shall be turned, for to cover the earth.
PSA 104:10 And thou sendest out wells into great valleys; waters shall pass betwixt the midst of hills.
PSA 104:11 All the beasts of the field shall drink; wild asses shall abide in their thirst, that is, to be filled in their thirst.
PSA 104:12 [[The]] Birds of the air shall dwell on those; from the midst of the stones they shall give voices.
PSA 104:13 And thou moistest [[the]] hills of their higher things; the earth shall be [[ful]] filled of the fruit of thy works.
PSA 104:14 And thou bringest forth hay to beasts; and herb to the service of men. That thou bring forth bread of the earth;
PSA 104:15 and that wine make glad the heart of men. That he make glad the face with oil; and that bread make steadfast the heart of man.
PSA 104:16 The trees of the field shall be [[full-]]filled, and the cedars of the Lebanon, which he planted;
PSA 104:17 sparrows shall make nest there. The house of the gyrfalcon is the leader of those [[or them]];
PSA 104:18 high hills be refuge to harts; the stone is refuge to urchins.
PSA 104:19 He made the moon into times; the sun knew his going down.
PSA 104:20 Thou hast set darknesses, and night is made; all beasts of the wood shall go therein.
PSA 104:21 Lions’ whelps roaring for to ravish; and to seek of God meat to them-selves.
PSA 104:22 The sun is risen, and those [[or they]] be gathered together; and those [[or they]] shall be set in their couches.
PSA 104:23 A man shall go out to his work; and to his working, till to the eventide.
PSA 104:24 Lord, thy works be magnified full much, thou hast made all things in wisdom; the earth is filled with thy possessions.
PSA 104:25 This sea is great and large to hands; there be creeping beasts, of which is no number. Little beasts with [[the]] great;
PSA 104:26 ships shall pass there. This dragon which thou hast formed, for to scorn him.
PSA 104:27 All things abide of thee; that thou give to them meat in time.
PSA 104:28 When thou shalt give to them, they shall gather; when thou shalt open thine hand, all things shall be filled with goodness.
PSA 104:29 But when thou shalt turn away thy face, they shall be troubled; thou shalt take away the spirit of them, and they shall fail; and they shall turn again into their dust.
PSA 104:30 Send out thy spirit, and they shall be formed of the new or reformed of new; and thou shalt renew the face of the earth.
PSA 104:31 The glory of the Lord be into the world; the Lord shall be glad in his works.
PSA 104:32 Which beholdeth the earth, and maketh it to tremble; which toucheth hills, and those [[or they]] smoke.
PSA 104:33 I shall sing to the Lord in my life; I shall say psalm to my God, as long as I am.
PSA 104:34 My speech be merry or mirth to him; forsooth I shall delight in the Lord.
PSA 104:35 Sinners fail from the earth, and wicked men fail, so that they be not; my soul, bless thou the Lord.
PSA 105:1 Alleluia. Acknowledge ye to the Lord, and inwardly call ye his name; tell ye his works among heathen men.
PSA 105:2 Sing ye to him, and say ye psalm to him, and tell ye all his marvels;
PSA 105:3 be ye praised in his holy name. The heart of men seeking the Lord be glad;
PSA 105:4 seek ye the Lord, and be ye con-firmed; seek ye ever[[more]] his face.
PSA 105:5 Have ye mind on his marvels, which he did; on his great wonders, and dooms of his mouth.
PSA 105:6 The seed of Abraham, his servant; the sons of Jacob, his chosen man.
PSA 105:7 He is our Lord God; his dooms be in all the earth.
PSA 105:8 He was mindful of his testament into the world; of the word which he commanded into a thousand gener-ations.
PSA 105:9 Which he disposed to Abraham; and of his oath to Isaac.
PSA 105:10 And he ordained it to Jacob into a commandment; and to Israel into everlasting testament.
PSA 105:11 And he said, I shall give to thee the land of Canaan; the cord of your heritage.
PSA 105:12 When they were in a little number; and the comelings of them were full few.
PSA 105:13 And they passed from folk into folk; and from a realm into another people.
PSA 105:14 He left not a man to annoy them; and he chastised kings for them.
PSA 105:15 Saying, Do not ye touch my christs; and do not ye do wickedly among my prophets.
PSA 105:16 And God called hunger on earth; and he wasted all the steadfastness of bread.
PSA 105:17 He sent a man before them; Joseph was sold into a servant.
PSA 105:18 They made low his feet in fetters, iron passed by [[or through]] his soul;
PSA 105:19 till the word of him came. The speech of the Lord enflamed him;
PSA 105:20 the king sent and unbound him; the prince of peoples sent and delivered him.
PSA 105:21 He ordained him lord of his house; and prince of all his possessions.
PSA 105:22 That he should learn [[or teach]] his princes as himself; and that he should teach his eld [[or old]] men prudence.
PSA 105:23 And Israel entered into Egypt; and Jacob was a comeling in the land of Ham.
PSA 105:24 And God increased his people greatly; and made them steadfast on his enemies.
PSA 105:25 He turned the heart of them, that they hated his people; and did guile [[or treachery]] against his servants.
PSA 105:26 He sent Moses, his servant; [[and]] that Aaron, whom he chose.
PSA 105:27 He putted [[or put]] in them to tell and to do the words of his miracles; and of his great wonders in the land of Ham.
PSA 105:28 He sent darknesses, and made it dark; and he made not bitter his words.
PSA 105:29 He turned the waters of them into blood; and he killed the fishes of them.
PSA 105:30 And the land of them gave pad-docks; in the privy places of the kings of them.
PSA 105:31 God said, and a flesh fly [[or hound flea]] came; and gnats in all the coasts of them.
PSA 105:32 He setted [[or put]] their rains into hail; fire burning in the land of them.
PSA 105:33 And he smote the vines of them, and the fig trees of them; and all-brake the trees of the coasts of them.
PSA 105:34 He said, and the locust came; and a bruchus of which there was no number.
PSA 105:35 And it ate all the hay in the land of them; and it ate all the fruit of the land of them.
PSA 105:36 And he killed each the first engen-dered thing in the land of them; the first fruits of all the travail of them.
PSA 105:37 And he led out them with silver and gold; and none was sick in the lineages of them.
PSA 105:38 Egypt was glad in the going out of them; for the dread of them lay on Egyptians.
PSA 105:39 He spreaded abroad a cloud, into the covering of them; and fire, that it shined to them by night.
PSA 105:40 They asked, and a curlew came; and he [[ful]] filled them with the bread of heaven.
PSA 105:41 He brake the stone, and waters flowed; floods went forth in the dry place.
PSA 105:42 For he was mindful of his holy word; which he had to Abraham, his servant.
PSA 105:43 And he led out his people in full out joying; and his chosen men in gladness.
PSA 105:44 And he gave to them the countries of heathen men; and they had in possession the travails of peoples.
PSA 105:45 That they keep his justifyings; and keep his law.
PSA 106:1 Alleluia. Acknowledge ye to the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy is without end.
PSA 106:2 Who shall speak of the powers of the Lord; shall make known all his praisings?
PSA 106:3 Blessed be they that keep doom; and do rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] in all time.
PSA 106:4 Lord, have thou mind on us, in the good pleasance of thy people; visit thou us in thine health.
PSA 106:5 To see in the goodness of thy chosen men, to be glad in the gladness of thy folk; that thou be praised with thine heritage.
PSA 106:6 We have sinned with our fathers; we have done unjustly, we have done wickedness.
PSA 106:7 Our fathers in Egypt understood not thy marvels; they were not mindful of the multitude of thy mercy. And they going into the sea, into the Red Sea, stirred him to wrath;
PSA 106:8 and he saved them for his name, that he should make known his power.
PSA 106:9 And he parted the Red Sea, and it was dried; and he led forth them in the depths of waters, as in desert.
PSA 106:10 And he saved them from the hand of haters; and he again-bought them from the hand of the enemy.
PSA 106:11 And the waters covered men troubling them; one of them abode not.
PSA 106:12 And they believed to his words; and they praised the praising of him.
PSA 106:13 They had soon done, they forgat his works; and they abided not his counsel.
PSA 106:14 And they coveted covetousness in desert; and tempted God in a place without water.
PSA 106:15 And he gave to them the asking of them; and he sent fullness into the souls of them.
PSA 106:16 And they wrathed Moses in the castles [[or tents]]; Aaron, the holy man of the Lord.
PSA 106:17 The earth was opened, and swal-lowed [[down]] Dathan; and covered on the congregation of Abiram.
PSA 106:18 And fire burnt on high in the synagogue of them; flame burnt [[the]] sinners.
PSA 106:19 And they made a calf in Horeb; and worshipped a molten image.
PSA 106:20 And they exchanged their glory; into the likeness of a calf eating hay.
PSA 106:21 They forgat God, that saved them, that did great works in Egypt,
PSA 106:22 marvels in the land of Ham; fearedful things in the Red Sea.
PSA 106:23 And God said, that he would lose them; and he would have, if Moses, his chosen man, had not stood in the breaking of his sight. That he should turn away his ire; lest he lost them.
PSA 106:24 And they had the desirable land for nought, for they believed not to his word,
PSA 106:25 and they grutched in their taber-nacles; they heard not the voice of the Lord.
PSA 106:26 And he raised his hand on them; to cast down them in desert.
PSA 106:27 And to cast away their seed in nations; and to lose them in countries.
PSA 106:28 And they made sacrifice to Baal-peor; and they ate the sacrifices of dead beasts.
PSA 106:29 And they wrathed God in their findings; and falling, either death, was multiplied in them.
PSA 106:30 And Phinehas stood, and pleased God; and the vengeance ceased.
PSA 106:31 And it was areckoned to him to rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; in gen-eration and into generation, till into without end.
PSA 106:32 And they wrathed God at the waters of against-saying; and Moses was travailed for them, that is, troubled in soul,
PSA 106:33 for they made bitter his spirit, and he parted [[or ordained]] in his lips.
PSA 106:34 They lost not [[the]] heathen men; which the Lord said to them to do.
PSA 106:35 And they were meddled [[or mingled]] among heathen men, and learned the works of them;
PSA 106:36 and served the graven images of them; and it was made to them into cause of stumbling.
PSA 106:37 And they offered their sons, and their daughters, to fiends.
PSA 106:38 And they shedded out innocent blood, the blood of their sons and of their daughters; which they sacrificed to the graven images of Canaan. And the earth was slain in bloods,
PSA 106:39 and was defouled in the works of them; and they did fornication in their findings.
PSA 106:40 And the Lord was wroth by strong vengeance against his people; and he had abomination of his heritage.
PSA 106:41 And he betook them into the hands of heathen men; and they that hated them, were lords of them.
PSA 106:42 And their enemies did tribulation to them, and they were meeked under the hands of enemies;
PSA 106:43 oft he delivered them. But they wrathed him in their counsel; and they were made low in their wicked-nesses.
PSA 106:44 And he saw, when they were set in tribulation; and he heard the prayer of them.
PSA 106:45 And he was mindful of his testa-ment; and it repented him by the multitude of his mercy.
PSA 106:46 And he gave them into mercies; in the sight of all men, that had taken them.
PSA 106:47 Our Lord God, make thou us safe; and gather together us from nations. That we acknowledge to thine holy name; and have glory in thy praising.
PSA 106:48 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from the world and till into the world; and all the people shall say, Be it done, be it done.
PSA 107:1 Alleluia. Acknowledge ye to the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy is into the world.
PSA 107:2 Say they, that be again-bought of the Lord; which he again-bought from the hand of the enemy,
PSA 107:3 from countries he gathered them together. From the rising of the sun, and from the going down; from the north, and from the sea.
PSA 107:4 They erred in wilderness, in a place without water; they found not way of the city of dwelling place.
PSA 107:5 They were hungry and thirsty; their souls failed in them.
PSA 107:6 And they cried to the Lord, when they were set in tribulation; and he delivered them from their needinesses.
PSA 107:7 And he led forth them into the right way; that they should go into the city of dwelling.
PSA 107:8 The mercies of the Lord, acknowl-edge to him; and his marvels acknowl-edge to the sons of men.
PSA 107:9 For he [[ful]] filled a void man; and he filled with goods an hungry man.
PSA 107:10 God delivered men sitting in dark-ness, and in the shadow of death; and men imprisoned in beggary, and in irons.
PSA 107:11 For they made bitter the speeches of God; and wrathed the counsel of the Highest.
PSA 107:12 And the heart of them was made meek in travails; and they were sick, and none was that helped.
PSA 107:13 And they cried to the Lord, when they were set in tribulation; and he delivered them from their needinesses.
PSA 107:14 And he led them out of dark-nesses, and [[the]] shadow of death; and brake the bonds of them.
PSA 107:15 The mercies of the Lord, ac-knowledge to him; and his marvels, acknowledge to the sons of men.
PSA 107:16 For he all-brake [[the]] brazen gates; and he brake [[the]] iron bars.
PSA 107:17 He up-took them from the way of their wickedness; for they were made low for their unrightfulnesses.
PSA 107:18 The soul of them loathed all meat; and they nighed unto the gates of death.
PSA 107:19 And they cried to the Lord, when they were set in tribulation; and he delivered them from their needinesses.
PSA 107:20 He sent his word, and healed them; and delivered them from the perishings of them.
PSA 107:21 The mercies of the Lord, ac-knowledge to him; and his marvels to the sons of men.
PSA 107:22 And offer they the sacrifice of praising; and tell they his works with full out joying.
PSA 107:23 They that go down into the sea in ships; and make working in many waters.
PSA 107:24 They saw the works of the Lord; and his marvels in the depth.
PSA 107:25 He said, and the spirit of tempest stood; and the waves thereof were areared.
PSA 107:26 They ascend [[or go up]] till to heavens, and go down unto the depths; the soul of them failed in evils.
PSA 107:27 They were troubled, and they were moved as a drunken man; and all the wisdom of them was devoured.
PSA 107:28 And they cried to the Lord, when they were set in tribulation; and he led them out of their needinesses.
PSA 107:29 And he ordained the tempest there-of into a soft wind, either peaceability; and the waves thereof were stilled.
PSA 107:30 And they were glad, for those [[or they]] were still; and he led them forth into the haven of their will.
PSA 107:31 The mercies of the Lord, acknowl-edge to him; and his marvels to the sons of men.
PSA 107:32 And enhance they him in the church of the people; and praise they him in the chairs of the elder men.
PSA 107:33 He hath set floods into desert; and the outgoings of waters into thirsty ground.
PSA 107:34 He hath set fruitful land into salti-ness; for the malice of men dwelling therein.
PSA 107:35 He hath set desert into ponds of waters; and [[the]] earth without water into [[the]] outgoings of waters.
PSA 107:36 And he set there hungry men; and they made a city of dwelling.
PSA 107:37 And they sowed fields, and planted vines; and made fruit of birth.
PSA 107:38 And he blessed them, and they were multiplied greatly; and he made not less their work beasts.
PSA 107:39 And they were made few; and were travailed of tribulation of evils and of sorrow.
PSA 107:40 Strife was shed [[or poured]] out on princes; and he made them for to err without the way, and not in the way.
PSA 107:41 And he helped the poor man from poverty; and setted [[or put]] families as a sheep bringing forth lambs.
PSA 107:42 Rightful men shall see, and shall be glad; and all wickedness shall stop his mouth.
PSA 107:43 Who is wise, and shall keep these things; and shall understand the mercies of the Lord?
PSA 108:1 The song of the psalm of David. Mine heart is ready, God, mine heart is ready; I shall sing, and I shall say psalm in my glory.
PSA 108:2 My glory, rise thou up, psaltery and harp, rise thou up; I shall rise up early.
PSA 108:3 Lord, I shall acknowledge to thee among peoples; and I shall say psalm to thee among nations.
PSA 108:4 For why, God, thy mercy is great on heavens; and thy truth is till to the clouds.
PSA 108:5 God, be thou enhanced above heavens; and thy glory over all earth.
PSA 108:6 That thy darlings be delivered, make thou safe with thy right hand, and hear [[thou]] me;
PSA 108:7 God spake in his holy place. I shall make full out joy, and I shall part Shechem; and I shall mete [[or measure]] the great valley of tabernacles.
PSA 108:8 Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; and Ephraim is the up-taking of mine head. Judah is my king;
PSA 108:9 Moab is the cauldron of mine hope. Into Idumea I shall stretch forth my shoe; aliens be made friends to me.
PSA 108:10 Who shall lead me forth into a strong city; who shall lead me forth till into Idumea?
PSA 108:11 Whether not thou, God, that hast put us away; and, God, shalt thou not go out in our virtues or hosts?
PSA 108:12 Give thou help to us out of tribulation; for the help of man is vain.
PSA 108:13 We shall make virtue in God; and he shall bring our enemies to nought.
PSA 109:1 To victory, the psalm of David. God, hold thou not still my praising;
PSA 109:2 for the mouth of the sinner, and the mouth of the guileful man, is opened on me. They spake against me with a guileful [[or treacherous]] tongue,
PSA 109:3 and they encompassed me with words of hatred; and fought against me without cause.
PSA 109:4 For that thing that they should love me, they backbited me; but I prayed for them.
PSA 109:5 And they setted against me evils for goods; and hatred for my love.
PSA 109:6 Ordain thou a sinner on him; and the devil stand on his right half.
PSA 109:7 When he is deemed, go he out condemned; and his prayer be made into sin.
PSA 109:8 His days be made few; and another take his bishopric.
PSA 109:9 His sons be made fatherless; and his wife a widow.
PSA 109:10 His sons trembling be borne over, and beg; and be they cast out of their habitations.
PSA 109:11 An usurer seek all his chattel; and aliens ravish his travails.
PSA 109:12 None helper be to him; neither any be that have mercy on his motherless children.
PSA 109:13 His sons be made into perishing; the name of him be done away in one generation.
PSA 109:14 The wickedness of his fathers come again into mind in the sight of the Lord; and the sin of his mother be not done away.
PSA 109:15 Be they made ever[[more]] against the Lord; and the mind of them perish from earth.
PSA 109:16 For that thing that he thought not to do mercy, and he pursued a poor man and a beggar; and to slay a man compunct in heart.
PSA 109:17 And he loved cursing, and it shall come to him; and he would not give blessing, and it shall be made far from him.
PSA 109:18 And he clothed cursing as a cloth, and it entered as water into his inner things; and as oil in his bones.
PSA 109:19 Be it made to him as a cloth, with which he is covered; and as a girdle, with which he is ever[[more]] girded.
PSA 109:20 This is the work of them that back-bite me with the Lord; and that speak evils against my life.
PSA 109:21 And thou, Lord God, do with me for thy name; for thy mercy is sweet. Deliver thou me,
PSA 109:22 for I am needy and poor; and mine heart is troubled within me.
PSA 109:23 I am taken away as a shadow, when it boweth away; and I am shaken away as locusts.
PSA 109:24 My knees be made feeble with fasting; and my flesh was changed for oil.
PSA 109:25 And I am made a shame to them; they saw me, and moved their heads.
PSA 109:26 My Lord God, help thou me; make thou me safe by thy mercy.
PSA 109:27 And they shall know, that this is thine hand; and thou, Lord, hast done it.
PSA 109:28 And they shall curse, and thou shalt bless, they that rise against me, be shamed; but thy servant shall be glad.
PSA 109:29 They that backbite me, be clothed with shame; and be they covered with their shame, as with a double cloth.
PSA 109:30 I shall acknowledge to the Lord greatly with my mouth; and I shall praise him in the middle of many men.
PSA 109:31 Which stood nigh on the right half of a poor man; to make safe my soul from pursuers.
PSA 110:1 The psalm of David. The Lord said to my Lord; Sit thou on my right side. Till I put thine enemies a stool of thy feet.
PSA 110:2 The Lord shall send out from Zion the rod of thy virtue; be thou lord in the midst of thine enemies.
PSA 110:3 The beginning is with thee in the day of thy virtue, in the brightnesses of saints; I begat thee of the womb, before the day star.
PSA 110:4 The Lord swore, and it shall not repent him; Thou art a priest without end, by the order of Melchizedek.
PSA 110:5 The Lord on thy right side; hath broken kings in the day of his venge-ance.
PSA 110:6 He shall deem among nations, he shall fill the land with fallings; he shall shake heads in the land of many men.
PSA 110:7 He drank of the strand [[or stream]] in the way; therefore he enhanced the head.
PSA 111:1 Alleluia. Lord, I shall acknowledge to thee in all mine heart; in the council, and congregation of just men.
PSA 111:2 The works of the Lord be great; sought out into all his wills.
PSA 111:3 His work is acknowledging and great doing; and his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] dwelleth into the world of world.
PSA 111:4 The Lord, merciful in will, and a merciful doer, hath made a mind of his marvels;
PSA 111:5 he hath given meat to men dreading him. He shall be mindful of his testament into the world;
PSA 111:6 he shall tell to his people the strength of his works. That he give to them the heritage of folks;
PSA 111:7 the works of his hands be truth and doom. All his commandments be faithful,
PSA 111:8 confirmed into the world of world; made in truth and equity.
PSA 111:9 The Lord sent redemption to his people; he commanded his testament without end. His name is holy and dreadful;
PSA 111:10 the beginning of wisdom is the dread of the Lord. Good understanding is to all that do it; his praising dwelleth into the world of world.
PSA 112:1 Alleluia. Blessed is the man that dreadeth the Lord; he shall delight full much in his commandments.
PSA 112:2 His seed shall be mighty in [[the]] earth; the generation of rightful [[or right]] men shall be blessed.
PSA 112:3 Glory and riches be in his house; and his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] dwelleth into the world of world.
PSA 112:4 Light is risen up in darknesses to rightful [[or right]] men; the Lord is merciful in will, and a merciful doer, and rightful [[or rightwise]].
PSA 112:5 The man is merry, that doeth mercy, and lendeth; he disposeth his words in doom;
PSA 112:6 for he shall not be moved without end. A just [[or rightwise]] man shall be in everlasting mind;
PSA 112:7 he shall not dread of an evil hearing. His heart is ready for to hope in the Lord;
PSA 112:8 his heart is confirmed, he shall not be moved, till he despise his enemies.
PSA 112:9 He spreaded abroad, he gave to poor men; his rightwiseness dwelleth into the world of world; his horn shall be raised in glory.
PSA 112:10 A sinner shall see, and shall be wroth; he shall gnash with his teeth, and shall fail, either shall wax rotten; the desire of sinners shall perish.
PSA 113:1 Alleluia. Servants, praise ye the Lord; praise ye the name of the Lord.
PSA 113:2 The name of the Lord be blessed; from this time now, and till into the world.
PSA 113:3 From the rising of the sun till to the going down; the name of the Lord is worthy to be praised.
PSA 113:4 The Lord is high above all folks; and his glory is above heavens.
PSA 113:5 Who is as our Lord God, that dwelleth in high things;
PSA 113:6 and beholdeth meek things in heaven and in earth?
PSA 113:7 Raising a needy man from the earth; and enhancing a poor man from drit.
PSA 113:8 That he set him with princes; with the princes of his people.
PSA 113:9 Which maketh a barren woman dwell in the house; a glad mother of sons.
PSA 114:1 Alleluia. In the going out of Israel from Egypt; of the house of Jacob from the heathen people.
PSA 114:2 Judah was made the hallowing of him; Israel the power of him.
PSA 114:3 The sea saw, and fled; Jordan was turned aback.
PSA 114:4 Mountains full out joyed as rams; and little hills as the lambs of sheep.
PSA 114:5 Thou sea, what was to thee, for thou fleddest; and thou, Jordan, for thou were turned aback?
PSA 114:6 Mountains, ye made full out joy as rams; and little hills, as the lambs of sheep.
PSA 114:7 The earth was moved from the face of the Lord; from the face of God of Jacob.
PSA 114:8 Which turned a stone into a pond of waters; and an hard rock into wells of waters.
PSA 115:1 Alleluia. Lord, not to us, Lord, not to us; but give thou glory to thy name. Of thy mercy, and of thy truth;
PSA 115:2 lest any time heathen men say, Where is the God of them?
PSA 115:3 Forsooth our God in heaven; did all things, whichever he would.
PSA 115:4 The simulacra of heathen men be silver and gold; the works of men’s hands.
PSA 115:5 They have mouths, and shall not speak; they have eyes, and shall not see.
PSA 115:6 They have ears, and shall not hear; they have nostrils, and shall not smell.
PSA 115:7 They have hands, and shall not grope; they have feet, and shall not go; they shall not cry in their throat.
PSA 115:8 They that make those simulacra be made like those [[or them]]; and all that trust in them.
PSA 115:9 The house of Israel hoped in the Lord; he is the helper of them, and the defender of them.
PSA 115:10 The house of Aaron hoped in the Lord; he is the helper of them, and the defender of them.
PSA 115:11 They that dread the Lord, hoped in the Lord; he is the helper of them, and the defender of them.
PSA 115:12 The Lord was mindful of us; and blessed us. He blessed the house of Israel; he blessed the house of Aaron.
PSA 115:13 He blessed all men that dread the Lord; both little and greater.
PSA 115:14 The Lord add, either increase, on you; on you, and on your sons.
PSA 115:15 Blessed be ye of the Lord; that made heaven and earth.
PSA 115:16 Heaven of heaven is to the Lord/ Heaven of heavens to the Lord; but he gave the earth to the sons of men.
PSA 115:17 Lord, not dead men shall praise thee; neither all men that go down into hell.
PSA 115:18 But we that live, bless the Lord; from this time now, and till into the world.
PSA 116:1 Alleluia. I loved the Lord; for the Lord shall hear the voice of my prayer.
PSA 116:2 For he bowed down his ear to me; and I shall inwardly call him in my days.
PSA 116:3 The sorrows of death encompass-ed me; and the perils of hell found me. I found tribulation and sorrow;
PSA 116:4 and I called inwardly the name of the Lord. Thou, Lord, deliver my soul;
PSA 116:5 the Lord is merciful, and just [[or rightwise]]; and our God doeth mercy.
PSA 116:6 And the Lord keepeth little children; I was meeked, and he delivered me.
PSA 116:7 My soul, turn thou into thy rest; for the Lord hath done well to thee.
PSA 116:8 For he hath delivered my soul from death; mine eyes from weepings, and my feet from falling down.
PSA 116:9 I shall please the Lord; in the country of them that live.
PSA 116:10 I believed, for which thing I spake; forsooth I was made low full much.
PSA 116:11 I said in my passing; Each man is a liar.
PSA 116:12 What shall I yield to the Lord; for all things which he hath yielded to me?
PSA 116:13 I shall take the cup of health; and I shall inwardly call the name of the Lord.
PSA 116:14 I shall yield my vows to the Lord before all his people;
PSA 116:15 the death of saints of the Lord is precious in his sight.
PSA 116:16 O! Lord, for I am thy servant; I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid. Thou hast broken my bonds,
PSA 116:17 to thee I shall offer a sacrifice of praising; and I shall inwardly call the name of the Lord.
PSA 116:18 I shall yield my vows to the Lord, in the sight of all his people;
PSA 116:19 in the foreyards of the house of the Lord, in the midst of thee, Jerusalem.
PSA 117:1 Alleluia. All heathen men, praise ye the Lord; all peoples, praise ye him.
PSA 117:2 For his mercy is confirmed on us; and the truth of the Lord dwelleth without end.
PSA 118:1 Alleluia. Acknowledge ye to the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy is without end.
PSA 118:2 Israel say now, for he is good; for his mercy is without end.
PSA 118:3 The house of Aaron say now; for his mercy is without end.
PSA 118:4 They that dread the Lord, say now; for his mercy is without end.
PSA 118:5 Out Of tribulation I inwardly called the Lord; and the Lord heard me in largeness.
PSA 118:6 The Lord is an helper to me; I shall not dread what man shall do to me.
PSA 118:7 The Lord is an helper to me; and I shall despise mine enemies.
PSA 118:8 It is better to trust in the Lord; than for to trust in man.
PSA 118:9 It is better for to hope in the Lord; than to hope in princes.
PSA 118:10 All folks encompassed me; and in the name of the Lord it befelled, for I am avenged on them.
PSA 118:11 They compassing encompassed me; and in the name of the Lord, for I am avenged on them.
PSA 118:12 They encompassed me as bees, and they burnt out as fire among thorns; and in the name of the Lord, for I am avenged on them.
PSA 118:13 I was hurled, and turned upside-down, that I should fall down; and the Lord took me up.
PSA 118:14 The Lord is my strength, and my praising; and he is made to me into health.
PSA 118:15 The voice of full out joying and of health; be in the tabernacles of just [[or rightwise]] men. The right hand of the Lord hath done virtue,
PSA 118:16 the right hand of the Lord en-hanced me; the right hand of the Lord hath done virtue.
PSA 118:17 I shall not die, but I shall live; and I shall tell the works of the Lord.
PSA 118:18 The Lord chastising hath chastised me; and he gave not me to death.
PSA 118:19 Open ye to me the gates of rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], and I shall enter by those [[or them]], and I shall acknowledge to the Lord;
PSA 118:20 this gate is of the Lord, and just [[or rightwise]] men shall enter by it.
PSA 118:21 I shall acknowledge to thee, for thou heardest me; and art made to me into health.
PSA 118:22 The stone which the builders reproved; this is made into the head of the corner.
PSA 118:23 This thing is made of the Lord; and it is wonderful before our eyes.
PSA 118:24 This is the day which the Lord made; make we full out joy, and be we glad therein.
PSA 118:25 O! Lord, make thou me safe, O! Lord, make thou well prosperity;
PSA 118:26 blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. We blessed you of the house of the Lord;
PSA 118:27 God is Lord, and he hath given light to us. Ordain ye a solemn day in thick peoples; till to the horns of the altar.
PSA 118:28 Thou art my God, and I shall acknowledge to thee; thou art my God, and I shall enhance thee. I shall acknowledge to thee, for thou heardest me; and thou art made to me into health.
PSA 118:29 Acknowledge ye to the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy is without end.
PSA 119:1 Alleluia. [[Aleph.]] Blessed be men without wem in the way; that go in the law of the Lord.
PSA 119:2 Blessed be they, that seek his wit-nessings; and seek him in all the heart.
PSA 119:3 For they that work wickedness; went not in his ways.
PSA 119:4 Thou hast commanded; that thy behests be kept greatly.
PSA 119:5 I would that my ways were dressed; to keep thy justifyings.
PSA 119:6 Then I shall not be shamed; when I shall behold perfectly in all thy behests.
PSA 119:7 I shall acknowledge to thee in the dressing [[or right ruling]] of mine heart; in that that I learned the dooms of thy rightfulnesses [[or rightwiseness]].
PSA 119:8 I shall keep thy justifyings; forsake thou not me on each side.
PSA 119:9 [[Beth.]] In what thing amendeth a young waxing man his way? in keep-ing thy words.
PSA 119:10 In all mine heart I sought thee; put thou me not away from thy behests.
PSA 119:11 In mine heart I hid thy speeches; that I do not sin against thee.
PSA 119:12 Lord, thou art blessed; teach thou me thy justifyings.
PSA 119:13 In my lips I have pronounced; all the dooms of thy mouth.
PSA 119:14 I delighted in the way of thy witnessings; as in all riches.
PSA 119:15 I shall be exercised, either busily occupied, in thy behests; and I shall behold thy ways.
PSA 119:16 I shall bethink in thy justifyings; I shall not forget thy words.
PSA 119:17 [[Gimel.]] Yield to thy servant; quicken thou me, and I shall keep thy words.
PSA 119:18 Lighten thou mine eyes; and I shall behold the marvels of thy law.
PSA 119:19 I am a comeling in earth; hide thou not thy behests from me.
PSA 119:20 My soul coveted to desire thy justifyings; in all time.
PSA 119:21 Thou blamedest the proud; they be cursed, that bow away from thy behests.
PSA 119:22 Do thou away from me shame and despising; for I sought thy witnessings.
PSA 119:23 For why princes sat, and spake against me; but thy servant was exercised in thy justifyings.
PSA 119:24 For why and thy witnessings is my thinking; and my counsel is thy justifyings.
PSA 119:25 [[Daleth.]] My soul cleaved to the pavement; quicken thou me by thy word.
PSA 119:26 I told out my ways, and thou heardest me; teach thou me thy justifyings.
PSA 119:27 Learn [[or Inform]] thou me the way of thy justifyings; and I shall be exercised in thy marvels.
PSA 119:28 My soul napped for annoyance; confirm thou me in thy words.
PSA 119:29 Remove thou from me the way of wickedness; and in thy law have thou mercy on me.
PSA 119:30 I chose the way of truth; I forgat not thy dooms.
PSA 119:31 Lord, I cleaved to thy witnessings; do not thou shame me.
PSA 119:32 I ran the way of thy command-ments; when thou alargedest mine heart.
PSA 119:33 [[He.]] Lord, set thou to me a law, the way of thy justifyings; and I shall seek it ever[[more]].
PSA 119:34 Give thou understanding to me, and I shall seek thy law; and I shall keep it in all mine heart.
PSA 119:35 Lead me forth in the path of thy behests; for I would or delight in it.
PSA 119:36 Bow down mine heart into thy witnessings; and not into avarice.
PSA 119:37 Turn thou away mine eyes, that they see not vanity; quicken thou me in thy way.
PSA 119:38 Ordain thy speech to thy servant; in thy dread.
PSA 119:39 Cut away my shame, which I supposed; for thy dooms be merry.
PSA 119:40 Lo! I coveted thy commandments; quicken thou me in thine equity.
PSA 119:41 [[Vau.]] And, Lord, thy mercy come [[up]] on me; thine health come by thy speech.
PSA 119:42 And I shall answer a word to men saying shame to me; for I hoped in thy words.
PSA 119:43 And take thou not away from my mouth the word of truth utterly; for I hoped above in thy dooms.
PSA 119:44 And I shall keep thy law ever-[[more]]; into the world, and into the world of world.
PSA 119:45 And I went in largeness; for I sought thy commandments.
PSA 119:46 And I spake of thy witnessings in the sight of kings; and I was not shamed.
PSA 119:47 And I bethought in thy behests; which I loved.
PSA 119:48 And I raised mine hands to thy commandments, which I loved; and I shall be exercised in thy justifyings.
PSA 119:49 [[Zain.]] Lord, have thou mind on thy word to thy servant; in which word thou hast given hope to me.
PSA 119:50 This comforted me in my lowness; for thy word quickened me.
PSA 119:51 Proud men did wickedly to me by all things; but I bowed not away from thy law.
PSA 119:52 Lord, I was mindful of thy dooms from the world; and I was comforted.
PSA 119:53 Failing held me; for sinners for-saking thy law.
PSA 119:54 Thy justifyings were delightable to me to be sung; in the place of my pilgrimage.
PSA 119:55 Lord, I had mind of thy name by night; and I kept thy law.
PSA 119:56 This thing was made to me; for I sought thy justifyings.
PSA 119:57 [[Cheth.]] Lord, my part; I said to keep thy law.
PSA 119:58 I besought thy face in all mine heart; have thou mercy on me by thy speech.
PSA 119:59 I bethought on my ways; and I turned my feet into thy witnessings.
PSA 119:60 I am ready, and I am not troubled; to keep thy commandments.
PSA 119:61 The cords of sinners have em-braced me; and I have not forgotten thy law.
PSA 119:62 At midnight, I rose to acknowl-edge to thee; on the dooms of thy justifyings.
PSA 119:63 I am partner of all that dread thee; and keep thy behests.
PSA 119:64 Lord, the earth is full of thy mercy; teach thou me thy justifyings.
PSA 119:65 [[Teth.]] Lord, thou hast done good-ness with thy servant; by thy word.
PSA 119:66 Teach thou me goodness, and lore, either chastising, and knowing; for I believed to thy behests.
PSA 119:67 Before that I was made meek, I trespassed; therefore I kept thy speech.
PSA 119:68 Thou art good; and in thy good-ness teach thou me thy justifyings.
PSA 119:69 The wickedness of them that be proud, is multiplied on me; but in all mine heart I shall seek thy behests.
PSA 119:70 The heart of them is crudded, either made hard, as milk; but I be-thought on thy law.
PSA 119:71 It is good to me, that thou hast made me meek; that I learn thy justi-fyings.
PSA 119:72 The law out of thy mouth is better to me; than thousands of gold and silver.
PSA 119:73 [[Jod.]] Thine hands made me, and formed me; give thou understanding to me, that I learn thy behests.
PSA 119:74 They that dread thee shall see me, and they shall be glad; for I hoped more on thy words.
PSA 119:75 Lord, I knew, that thy dooms be equity; and in thy truth thou hast made me meek.
PSA 119:76 Thy mercy be made, that it comfort me; by thy speech to thy servant.
PSA 119:77 Thy merciful doings come to me, and I shall live; for thy law is my thinking.
PSA 119:78 They that be proud be shamed, for unjustly they did wickedness against me; but I shall be exercised in thy behests.
PSA 119:79 They that dread thee be turned to me; and they that know thy witnessings.
PSA 119:80 Mine heart be made unwemmed in thy justifyings; that I be not shamed.
PSA 119:81 [[Caph.]] My soul failed into thine health; and I hoped more in thy word.
PSA 119:82 Mine eyes failed into thy speech; saying, When shalt thou comfort me?
PSA 119:83 For I am made as a bouget [[or bottle]] in frost; I have not forgotten thy justifyings.
PSA 119:84 How many be the days of thy servant; when thou shalt make doom of them that pursue me?
PSA 119:85 Wicked men told to me janglings; but not as thy law.
PSA 119:86 All thy commandments be truth; wicked men have pursued me, help thou me.
PSA 119:87 Almost they ended me in [[the]] earth; but I forsook not thy command-ments.
PSA 119:88 By thy mercy quicken thou me; and I shall keep the witnessings of thy mouth.
PSA 119:89 [[Lamed.]] Lord, thy word dwelleth in heaven; without end.
PSA 119:90 Thy truth dwelleth in generation, and into generation; thou hast founded the earth, and it dwelleth.
PSA 119:91 The day lasteth continually by thy ordinances; for all things serve to thee.
PSA 119:92 But for thy law was my thinking; then peradventure I had perished in my lowness.
PSA 119:93 Without end I shall not forget thy justifyings; for in those [[or them]] thou hast quickened me.
PSA 119:94 I am thine, make thou me safe; for I have sought thy justifyings.
PSA 119:95 Sinners abode me, for to lose me; I understood thy witnessings.
PSA 119:96 I saw the end of all end; thy commandment is full large.
PSA 119:97 [[Mem.]] Lord, how loved I [[or I loved]] thy law; all day it is my thinking.
PSA 119:98 Above mine enemies thou madest me prudent by thy commandment; for it is to me without end.
PSA 119:99 I understood over all men teaching me; for thy witnessings is my thinking.
PSA 119:100 I understood above eld [[or old]] men; for I sought thy commandments.
PSA 119:101 I forbade my feet from all evil way; that I keep thy words.
PSA 119:102 I bowed not from thy dooms; for thou hast set law to me.
PSA 119:103 Thy speeches be full sweet to my cheeks; above honey to my mouth.
PSA 119:104 I understood of thy behests; there-fore I hated all the ways of wickedness.
PSA 119:105 [[Nun.]] Thy word is a lantern to my feet; and a light to my paths.
PSA 119:106 I swore, and purposed steadfastly; to keep the dooms of thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]].
PSA 119:107 I am made low by all things; Lord, quicken thou me by thy word.
PSA 119:108 Lord, make thou well pleasing the willful things of my mouth; and teach thou me thy dooms.
PSA 119:109 My soul is ever[[more]] in mine hands; and I forgat not thy law.
PSA 119:110 Sinners setted a snare to me; and I erred not from thy commandments.
PSA 119:111 I purchased thy witnessings by heritage without end; for those [[or they]] be the full [[out]] joying of mine heart.
PSA 119:112 I bowed mine heart to do thy justifyings without end; for reward.
PSA 119:113 [[Samech.]] I hated wicked men; and I loved thy law.
PSA 119:114 Thou art mine helper, and mine up-taker; and I hoped more in thy word.
PSA 119:115 Ye wicked men, bow away from me; and I shall seek the command-ments of my God.
PSA 119:116 Up-take thou me by thy word, and I shall live; and shame thou not me for mine abiding.
PSA 119:117 Help thou me, and I shall be safe; and I shall bethink ever[[more]] in thy justifyings.
PSA 119:118 Thou hast forsaken all men going away from thy dooms; for the thought of them is unjust.
PSA 119:119 I areckoned all the sinners of earth to be breakers of the law; therefore I loved thy witnessings.
PSA 119:120 Nail thou my flesh with thy dread; for I dreaded of thy dooms.
PSA 119:121 [[Ain.]] I did doom and rightwise-ness; betake thou not me to them that falsely challenge me.
PSA 119:122 Take up thy servant into goodness; they that be proud challenge not me.
PSA 119:123 Mine eyes failed into thine health; and into the speech of thy rightful-ness [[or rightwiseness]].
PSA 119:124 Do thou with thy servant after thy mercy; and teach thou me thy justify-ings.
PSA 119:125 I am thy servant; give thou under-standing to me, that I know thy witnessings.
PSA 119:126 Lord, it is time to do; they have destroyed thy law.
PSA 119:127 Therefore I loved thy command-ments; more than gold and topaz.
PSA 119:128 Therefore I was dressed to all thy behests; I hated all wicked way.
PSA 119:129 [[Pe.]] Lord, thy witnessings be wonderful; therefore my soul sought those [[or them]].
PSA 119:130 Declaring of thy words lighteneth; and it giveth understanding to meek men.
PSA 119:131 I opened my mouth, and drew the spirit; for I desired thy commandments.
PSA 119:132 Behold thou on me, and have mercy on me; by the doom of them that love thy name.
PSA 119:133 Dress thou my goings by thy speech; that all unrightfulness have not lordship on me.
PSA 119:134 Again-buy thou me from the false challenges of men; that I keep thy behests.
PSA 119:135 Lighten thy face on thy servant; and teach thou me thy justifyings.
PSA 119:136 Mine eyes led forth the outgoings of waters; for they kept not thy law.
PSA 119:137 [[Tzaddi.]] Lord, thou art just [[or rightwise]]; and thy doom is rightful [[or right]].
PSA 119:138 Thou hast commanded rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], thy witnessings; and thy truth greatly to be kept.
PSA 119:139 My fervent love made me to be melted, either languished; for mine enemies forgat thy words.
PSA 119:140 Thy speech is set afire; and thy servant loved it.
PSA 119:141 I am young, and despised; I forgat not thy justifyings.
PSA 119:142 Lord, thy rightfulness [[or rightwise-ness]]is rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] without end; and thy law is truth.
PSA 119:143 Tribulation and anguish have found me; thy behests is my thinking.
PSA 119:144 Thy witnessings is equity without end; give thou understanding to me, and I shall live.
PSA 119:145 [[Koph.]] I cried in all mine heart, Lord, hear thou me; I shall seek thy justifyings.
PSA 119:146 I cried to thee, make thou me safe; that I keep thy commandments.
PSA 119:147 I before came in ripeness, and I cried; I hoped above on thy words.
PSA 119:148 Mine eyes before came to thee full early; that I should bethink on thy speeches.
PSA 119:149 Lord, hear thou my voice by thy mercy; and quicken [[or enliven]] thou me by thy doom.
PSA 119:150 They that pursue me nighed to wickedness; forsooth they be made far from thy law.
PSA 119:151 Lord, thou art nigh; and all thy ways be truth.
PSA 119:152 In the beginning I knew of thy witnessings; for thou hast founded those [[or them]] without end.
PSA 119:153 [[Resh.]] See thou my meekness, and deliver thou me; for I forgat not thy law.
PSA 119:154 Deem thou my doom, and again-buy thou me; quicken thou me for thy speech.
PSA 119:155 Health is far from sinners; for they sought not thy justifyings.
PSA 119:156 Lord, thy mercies be many; quicken thou me by thy doom.
PSA 119:157 They be many that pursue me, and do tribulation to me; I bowed not away from thy witnessings.
PSA 119:158 I saw breakers of the law, and I was melted, either languished; for they kept not thy speeches.
PSA 119:159 Lord, see thou, for I loved thy commandments; quicken thou me in thy mercy.
PSA 119:160 The beginning of thy word is truth; all the dooms of thy rightwise-ness be without end.
PSA 119:161 [[Schin.]] Princes pursued me with-out cause; and my heart dreaded of thy words.
PSA 119:162 I shall be glad on thy speeches; as he that findeth many spoils.
PSA 119:163 I hated and loathed wickedness; forsooth I loved thy law.
PSA 119:164 I said praisings to thee seven times in the day; on the dooms of thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]].
PSA 119:165 Much peace is to them that love thy law; and no cause of stumbling is to them.
PSA 119:166 Lord, I abode thine health; and I loved thy behests.
PSA 119:167 My soul kept thy witnessings; and loved those [[or them]] greatly.
PSA 119:168 I kept thy commandments, and thy witnessings; for all my ways be in thy sight.
PSA 119:169 [[Tau.]] Lord, my beseeching come nigh in thy sight; by thy speech give thou understanding to me.
PSA 119:170 Mine asking enter into thy sight; by thy speech deliver thou me.
PSA 119:171 My lips shall tell out an hymn; when thou hast taught me thy justi-fyings.
PSA 119:172 My tongue shall pronounce thy speech; for why all thy command-ments be equity.
PSA 119:173 Thine hand be made, that it save me; for I have chosen thy behests.
PSA 119:174 Lord, I coveted thine health; and thy law is my thinking.
PSA 119:175 My soul shall live, and it shall praise thee; and thy dooms shall help me.
PSA 119:176 I erred as a sheep that perished; Lord, seek thy servant, for I forgat not thy commandments.
PSA 120:1 The song of degrees. When I was set in tribulation, I cried to the Lord; and he heard me.
PSA 120:2 Lord, deliver thou my soul from wicked lips; and from a guileful tongue.
PSA 120:3 What shall be given to thee, either what shall be laid to thee; to a guileful [[or treacherous]] tongue?
PSA 120:4 Sharp arrows of the mighty; with coals that make desolate.
PSA 120:5 Alas to me! for my dwelling in an alien land is made long, I dwelled with men dwelling in Kedar;
PSA 120:6 my soul was much time a come-ling. I was peaceable with them that hated peace;
PSA 120:7 when I spake to them, they impugned, either against-said, me with-out cause.
PSA 121:1 The song of degrees. I raised mine eyes to the hills; from whence help shall come to me.
PSA 121:2 Mine help is of the Lord; that made heaven and earth.
PSA 121:3 The Lord give not thy foot into moving; neither he nap, that keepeth thee.
PSA 121:4 Lo! he shall not nap, neither sleep; that keepeth Israel.
PSA 121:5 The Lord keepeth thee; the Lord is thy protection above thy right hand.
PSA 121:6 The sun shall not burn thee by day; neither the moon by night.
PSA 121:7 The Lord keep thee from all evil; the Lord keep thy soul.
PSA 121:8 The Lord keep thy going in and thy going out; from this time now and into the world.
PSA 122:1 The song of degrees of David. I am glad in these things, that be said to me; We shall go into the house of the Lord.
PSA 122:2 Our feet were standing; in thy halls or foreyards, thou Jerusalem.
PSA 122:3 Jerusalem, which is builded as a city; whose partaking thereof is into the same thing.
PSA 122:4 For the lineages, the lineages of the Lord, ascended [[or went up]] thither, the witnessing of Israel; to acknowl-edge to the name of the Lord.
PSA 122:5 For they sat there on seats in doom; seats on the house of David.
PSA 122:6 Pray ye those things, that be to the peace of Jerusalem; and abundance be to them that love thee.
PSA 122:7 Peace be made in thy strength; and abundance in thy towers.
PSA 122:8 For my brethren and my neigh-bours; I spake peace of thee.
PSA 122:9 For the house of our Lord God; I sought goods to thee.
PSA 123:1 The song of degrees. To thee I have raised mine eyes; that dwellest in heavens.
PSA 123:2 Lo! as the eyes of servants be in the hands of their lords. As the eyes of the handmaid be in the hands of her lady; so our eyes be to our Lord God, till he have mercy on us.
PSA 123:3 Lord, have thou mercy on us, have thou mercy on us; for we be much filled with despising.
PSA 123:4 For our soul is much filled; we be shame to them that be abundant with riches, and despising to proud men.
PSA 124:1 The song of degrees of David. Israel say now, No but for the Lord was in us;
PSA 124:2 no but for the Lord was in us. When men rose up against us;
PSA 124:3 in hap they had swallowed us quick. When the strong vengeance of them was wroth against us;
PSA 124:4 in hap water had swallowed us up. Our soul passed through a strand [[or stream]];
PSA 124:5 in hap our soul had passed through a water unsufferable.
PSA 124:6 Blessed be the Lord; that gave not us into taking [[or catching]] of the teeth of them.
PSA 124:7 Our soul, as a sparrow, is delivered; from the snare of hunters. The snare is all-broken; and we be delivered.
PSA 124:8 Our help is in the name of the Lord; that made heaven and earth.
PSA 125:1 The song of degrees. They that trust in the Lord be as the hill of Zion; he shall not be moved without end, that dwelleth in Jerusalem.
PSA 125:2 Hills be in the compass of it, and the Lord is in the compass of his people; from this time now, and into the world.
PSA 125:3 For the Lord shall not leave the rod of sinners on the part of just [[or rightwise]] men; that just men hold not forth their hands to wickedness.
PSA 125:4 Lord, do thou well to good men; and to rightful [[or right]] in heart.
PSA 125:5 But the Lord shall lead them that bow into obligations, with them that work wickedness; peace be upon Israel.
PSA 126:1 The song of degrees. When the Lord turned the captivity of Zion; we were made as comforted.
PSA 126:2 Then our mouth was filled with joy; and our tongue with full out joying. Then they shall say among heathen men; The Lord magnified to do with them.
PSA 126:3 The Lord magnified to do with us; we be made glad.
PSA 126:4 Lord, turn thou our captivity; as a strand [[or stream]] in the south.
PSA 126:5 They that sow in tears; shall reap in full out joying.
PSA 126:6 They going, went, and wept; sending their seeds. But they coming, shall come with full out joying; bearing their handfuls.
PSA 127:1 The song of degrees of Solomon. No but or But if the Lord build the house; they that built it have travailed in vain. No but or But if the Lord keepeth the city; he waketh in vain that keepeth it.
PSA 127:2 It is vain to you to rise before the light; rise ye after ye have set, that eat the bread of sorrow. When he shall give sleep to his loved;
PSA 127:3 lo! the heritage of the Lord is sons, the meed is the fruit of [[the]] womb.
PSA 127:4 As arrows be in the hand of the mighty; so the sons of them that be shaken out.
PSA 127:5 Blessed is the man, that hath [[full-]]filled his desire of those [[or them]]; he shall not be shamed, when he shall speak to his enemies in the gate.
PSA 128:1 The song of degrees. Blessed be all men, that dread the Lord; that go in his ways.
PSA 128:2 For thou shalt eat the travails of thine hands; thou art blessed, and it shall be well to thee.
PSA 128:3 Thy wife shall be as a plenteous vine; in the sides of thine house. Thy sons as the new springs of olive trees; in the compass of thy board.
PSA 128:4 Lo! so a man shall be blessed; that dreadeth the Lord.
PSA 128:5 The Lord bless thee from Zion; and see thou the goods of Jerusalem in all the days of thy life.
PSA 128:6 And see thou the sons of thy sons; see thou peace on Israel.
PSA 129:1 The song of degrees. Israel say now; Oft they have fought against me from my youth.
PSA 129:2 Oft they [[have]] fought against me from my youth; and soothly they might not to me
PSA 129:3 Sinners forged on my back; they made long their wickedness.
PSA 129:4 The Lord is just [[or rightwise]], he shall beat the nolls of sinners;
PSA 129:5 all that hate Zion be they shamed, and turned aback.
PSA 129:6 Be they made as the hay of housetops; that dried up, before that it be drawn up.
PSA 129:7 Of which hay he that shall reap, shall not fill his hand; and he that shall gather handfuls, shall not fill his bosom.
PSA 129:8 And they that passed forth said not, The blessing of the Lord be on you; we blessed you in the name of the Lord.
PSA 130:1 The song of degrees. Lord, I cried to thee from the depths;
PSA 130:2 Lord, hear thou my voice. Thine ears be made attentive into the voice of my beseeching.
PSA 130:3 Lord, if thou keepest wickednesses; Lord, who shall sustain, or abide?
PSA 130:4 For mercy is at thee;
PSA 130:5 and, Lord, for thy law I abode thee. My soul sustained in his word;
PSA 130:6 my soul hoped in the Lord. From the morrowtide keeping till to the night;
PSA 130:7 Israel hope in the Lord. For why mercy is at the Lord; and plenteous redemption is at him.
PSA 130:8 And he shall again-buy Israel; from all the wickednesses thereof.
PSA 131:1 The song of degrees to David. Lord, mine heart is not enhanced; neither mine eyes be raised. Neither I went in great things; neither in marvels above me.
PSA 131:2 If I feeled not meekly; but [[I]] en-hanced my soul. As a child weaned on his mother; so yielding be in my soul.
PSA 131:3 Israel, hope in the Lord; from this time now and into the world.
PSA 132:1 The song of degrees. Lord, have thou mind on David; and of all his mildness.
PSA 132:2 As he swore to the Lord; he made a vow to [[the]] God of Jacob.
PSA 132:3 I shall not enter into the taber-nacle of mine house; I shall not ascend [[or go up]] into the bed of my resting.
PSA 132:4 I shall not give sleep to mine eyes; and napping to mine eyelids.
PSA 132:5 And rest to my temples, till I find a place to the Lord; a tabernacle to [[the]] God of Jacob.
PSA 132:6 Lo! we heard that the ark of the testament is in Ephratah [[or we have heard of it in Ephratah]]; we found it in the fields of the wood.
PSA 132:7 We shall enter into the tabernacle of him; we shall worship in the place, where his feet stood.
PSA 132:8 Lord, rise thou into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thine hallowing.
PSA 132:9 Thy priests be clothed with right-fulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and thy saints make full out joy.
PSA 132:10 For David, thy servant; turn thou not away the face of thy christ.
PSA 132:11 The Lord swore in truth to David, and he shall not make him [[in]] vain; Of the fruit of thy womb I shall set on thy seat.
PSA 132:12 If thy sons shall keep my testament; and my witnessings, these which I shall teach them. And the sons of them till into the world; they shall set on thy seat.
PSA 132:13 For the Lord chose Zion; he chose it into a dwelling to himself.
PSA 132:14 This is my rest into the world of world; I shall dwell here, for I chose it.
PSA 132:15 I blessing shall bless the widow of it; I shall [[ful]] fill with loaves the poor men of it.
PSA 132:16 I shall clothe with health the priests thereof; and the holy men thereof shall make full out joy in full out joying or rejoicing.
PSA 132:17 Thither I shall bring forth the horn of David; I [[have]] made ready a lantern to my christ.
PSA 132:18 I shall clothe his enemies with shame; but mine hallowing shall flower out on him.
PSA 133:1 The song of degrees. Lo! how good and how merry it is; that brethren dwell together.
PSA 133:2 As ointment in the head; that goeth down into the beard, into the beard of Aaron. That goeth down into the collar of his cloth;
PSA 133:3 as the dew of Hermon, that goeth down into the hill of Zion. For there the Lord sent blessing; and life till into the world, that is, without end.
PSA 134:1 The song of degrees. Lo! now bless ye the Lord; all the servants of the Lord. Ye that stand in the house of the Lord; in the halls or foreyards of the house of our God.
PSA 134:2 In nights raise your hands into holy things; and bless ye the Lord.
PSA 134:3 The Lord bless thee from Zion; the which Lord made heaven and earth.
PSA 135:1 Alleluia. Praise ye the name of the Lord; ye servants of the Lord, praise ye.
PSA 135:2 Ye that stand in the house of the Lord; in the halls or foreyards of the house of our God.
PSA 135:3 Praise ye the Lord, for the Lord is good; sing ye to his name, for it is sweet.
PSA 135:4 For the Lord chose Jacob to him-self; [[and]] Israel into possession to himself.
PSA 135:5 For I have known, that the Lord is great; and our God before all gods.
PSA 135:6 The Lord made all things, what-ever things he would, in heaven and in earth; in the sea, and in all depths of waters.
PSA 135:7 He led out clouds from the farthest part of [[the]] earth; and made light-nings into rain. Which bringeth forth winds from his treasures [[or treasuries]];
PSA 135:8 which killed the first begotten things of Egypt, from man unto beast.
PSA 135:9 He sent out signs and great wonders, in the middle of thee, thou Egypt; into Pharaoh, and into all his servants.
PSA 135:10 Which smote many folks; and killed strong kings.
PSA 135:11 Sihon, the king of Amorites, and Og, the king of Bashan; and all the realms of Canaan.
PSA 135:12 And he gave the land of them heritage; to be heritage to Israel, his people.
PSA 135:13 Lord, thy name is without end; Lord, thy memorial be in generation and into generation.
PSA 135:14 For the Lord shall deem his people; and he shall be prayed in his servants.
PSA 135:15 The simulacra of heathen men be silver and gold; the works of the hands of men.
PSA 135:16 Those images have a mouth, and shall not speak; those [[or they]] have eyes, and shall not see.
PSA 135:17 Those [[or they]] have ears, and shall not hear; for there is no spirit in the mouth of them.
PSA 135:18 They that make those [[things]], be made like them; and all that trust in them.
PSA 135:19 The house of Israel, bless ye the Lord; the house of Aaron, bless ye the Lord.
PSA 135:20 The house of Levi, bless ye the Lord; ye that dread the Lord, bless ye the Lord.
PSA 135:21 Blessed be the Lord of Zion; that dwelleth in Jerusalem.
PSA 136:1 Alleluia. Acknowledge ye to the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy is without end.
PSA 136:2 Acknowledge ye to the God of gods.
PSA 136:3 Acknowledge ye to the Lord of lords.
PSA 136:4 Which alone maketh great marvels.
PSA 136:5 Which made heavens by under-standing.
PSA 136:6 Which made steadfast [[the]] earth on waters.
PSA 136:7 Which made great lights.
PSA 136:8 The sun into the power of the day.
PSA 136:9 The moon and the stars into [[the]] power of the night.
PSA 136:10 Which smote Egypt with the first engendered things of them.
PSA 136:11 Which led out Israel from the midst of them.
PSA 136:12 In a mighty hand, and in an high arm.
PSA 136:13 Which parted the Red Sea into partings.
PSA 136:14 And led out Israel through the midst thereof.
PSA 136:15 And he cast adown Pharaoh and his power, or virtue, in the Red Sea.
PSA 136:16 Which led over his people through [[the]] desert.
PSA 136:17 Which smote great kings.
PSA 136:18 And killed strong kings.
PSA 136:19 Sihon, the king of Amorites.
PSA 136:20 And Og, the king of Bashan.
PSA 136:21 And he gave the land of them to be heritage.
PSA 136:22 Heritage to Israel, his servant.
PSA 136:23 For in our lowness he had mind on us.
PSA 136:24 And he again-bought us from our enemies.
PSA 136:25 Which giveth meat to each flesh.
PSA 136:26 Acknowledge ye to the God of heaven. Acknowledge ye to the Lord of lords; for his mercy is without end.
PSA 137:1 On the floods of Babylon, there we sat, and wept; while we bethought on Zion.
PSA 137:2 In sallows in the midst thereof; we hanged up our organs.
PSA 137:3 For they that led us prisoners; asked us there the words of songs. And they that led away us said; Sing ye to us an hymn of the songs of Zion.
PSA 137:4 How shall we sing a song of the Lord; in an alien land?
PSA 137:5 If I forget thee, Jerusalem; my right hand be given to forgetting.
PSA 137:6 My tongue cleave to my cheeks; if I bethink not on thee. If I purposed not of thee, Jerusalem; in the beginning of my gladness.
PSA 137:7 Lord, have thou mind on the sons of Edom; for the day of Jerusalem. Which say, Extinguish ye, extinguish ye; till to the foundament therein.
PSA 137:8 Thou wretched daughter of Bab-ylon; he is blessed, that yieldeth to thee thy yielding, which thou yieldest to us.
PSA 137:9 He is blessed, that shall hold; and hurtle down his little children at the stone.
PSA 138:1 [[The psalm of David.]] Lord, I shall acknowledge to thee in all mine heart; for thou heardest the words of my mouth. My God, I shall sing to thee in the sight of angels;
PSA 138:2 I shall worship toward thine holy temple, and I shall acknowledge to thy name. On thy mercy and thy truth; for thou hast magnified thine holy name above all things.
PSA 138:3 In whatever day I shall inwardly call thee, hear thou me; thou shalt multiply virtue in my soul.
PSA 138:4 Lord, all the kings of earth acknowl-edge to thee; for they heard all the words of thy mouth.
PSA 138:5 And sing they in the ways of the Lord; for the glory of the Lord is great.
PSA 138:6 For the Lord is high, and behold-eth meek things; and knoweth afar high things.
PSA 138:7 If I shall go in the midst of tribu-lation, thou shalt quicken me; and thou stretchedest forth thine hand on the ire of mine enemies, and thy right hand made me safe.
PSA 138:8 The Lord shall yield for me, Lord, thy mercy is without end; despise thou not the works of thine hands.
PSA 139:1 To victory, the psalm of David. Lord, thou hast proved me, and hast known me;
PSA 139:2 thou hast known my sitting, and my rising again. Thou hast understood my thoughts from [[a]] far;
PSA 139:3 thou hast inquired of my path and my cord. And thou hast before-seen all my ways;
PSA 139:4 for no word is in my tongue. Lo! Lord, thou hast known all things,
PSA 139:5 the new things and eld [[or old]]; thou hast formed me, and hast set thine hand on me.
PSA 139:6 Thy knowing is made wonderful of me; it is comforted, and I shall not be able to it.
PSA 139:7 Whither shall I go from thy spirit; and whither shall I flee from thy face?
PSA 139:8 If I shall ascend [[or go up]] into heaven, thou art there; if I shall go down into hell, thou art present.
PSA 139:9 If I shall take my feathers full early; and shall dwell in the last parts of the sea.
PSA 139:10 And soothly thither thine hand shall lead me forth; and thy right hand shall hold me.
PSA 139:11 And I said, In hap darknesses shall defoul me; and the night is my lightening in my delights.
PSA 139:12 For why darknesses shall not be made dark from thee, and the night shall be lightened as the day; as the darknesses thereof, so and the light thereof.
PSA 139:13 For thou haddest in possession my reins; thou tookest me up from the womb of my mother.
PSA 139:14 I shall acknowledge to thee, for thou art magnified dreadfully; thy works be wonderful, and my soul shall know that full much.
PSA 139:15 My bone, which thou madest in private, is not hid from thee; and my substance formed in the lower parts of [[the]] earth.
PSA 139:16 Thine eyes saw mine unperfect thing, and all men shall be written in thy book; days shall be formed, and no man is in those [[or them]].
PSA 139:17 Forsooth, God, thy friends be made honourable full much to me; the prince-hood of them is comforted full much.
PSA 139:18 I shall number them, and they shall be multiplied above the gravel; I rose up, and yet I am with thee.
PSA 139:19 For thou, God, shalt slay sinners; ye men-quellers, bow away from me.
PSA 139:20 For they say in thought; Take they their cities in vanity.
PSA 139:21 Lord, whether I hated not them that hated thee; and I failed, that is, mourned greatly, on thine enemies?
PSA 139:22 By perfect hatred I hated them; they were made enemies to me.
PSA 139:23 God, prove thou me, and know thou mine heart; ask thou me, and know thou my paths.
PSA 139:24 And see thou, if way of wicked-ness is in me; and lead thou me forth in [[the]] everlasting way.
PSA 140:1 To victory, the psalm of David. Lord, deliver thou me from an evil man; deliver thou me from a wicked man.
PSA 140:2 Which thought wickednesses in the heart; all day they ordained battles.
PSA 140:3 They sharpened their tongues as serpents; the venom of snakes is under the lips of them.
PSA 140:4 Lord, keep thou me from the hand of the sinner; and deliver thou me from wicked men. Which thought to deceive my goings;
PSA 140:5 proud men hid a snare to me. And they laid forth cords into a snare; they setted a trap to me beside the way.
PSA 140:6 I said to the Lord, Thou art my God; Lord, hear thou the voice of my beseeching.
PSA 140:7 Lord, Lord, the virtue of mine health; thou madest a shadow on mine head in the day of battle.
PSA 140:8 Lord, betake thou not me from my desire to the sinner; they thought against me, forsake thou not me, lest peradventure they be enhanced.
PSA 140:9 The head of the compass of them; the travail of their lips shall cover them.
PSA 140:10 Coals shall fall on them, thou shalt cast them down into fire; into wretchednesses where they shall not be able to stand.
PSA 140:11 A man that is a great jangler shall not be dressed [[or rightforth ruled]] in earth; evils shall take an unjust man into perishing.
PSA 140:12 I have known, that the Lord shall make doom of a needy man; and the vengeance of poor men.
PSA 140:13 Nevertheless just [[or rightwise]] men shall acknowledge to thy name; and rightful [[or right]] men shall dwell with thy cheer.
PSA 141:1 The psalm of David. Lord, I cried to thee, hear thou me; give thou attention to my voice, when I shall cry to thee.
PSA 141:2 My prayer be dressed as incense in thy sight; the raising up of mine hands be as the eventide sacrifice.
PSA 141:3 Lord, set thou a keeping to my mouth; and a door of standing about to my lips.
PSA 141:4 Bow thou not [[down]] mine heart into words of malice; to excuse excusings in sin. With men working wickedness; and I shall not commune with the chosen men of them.
PSA 141:5 A just [[or rightwise]] man shall reprove me in mercy, and he shall blame me; but the oil of a sinner make not fat mine head. For why and yet my prayer is in the well pleasant [[or well pleased]] things of them;
PSA 141:6 for the doomsmen of them joined to the stone were sopped up. Hear they my words, for they were mighty.
PSA 141:7 As fatness is broken out on the earth; our bones be scattered nigh hell.
PSA 141:8 Lord, Lord, for mine eyes be to thee, I hoped in thee; take thou not away my soul.
PSA 141:9 Keep thou me from the snare which they ordained to me; and from the traps of them that work wickedness.
PSA 141:10 Sinners shall fall in the net thereof; I am alone till I pass by.
PSA 142:1 The learning of David; his prayer, when he was in the den. With my voice I cried to the Lord; with my voice I prayed heartily to the Lord.
PSA 142:2 I shedded [[or poured]] out my prayer in his sight; and I pronounced my tribulation before him.
PSA 142:3 While my spirit faileth of me; and thou hast known my paths. In this way in which I went; proud men hid a snare to me.
PSA 142:4 I beheld to the right side, and I saw; and none there was that knew me. Flight perished from me; and none there is that seeketh to help my soul.
PSA 142:5 Lord, I cried to thee; I said, Thou art mine hope; my part in the land of livers.
PSA 142:6 Give thou attention to my beseech-ing; for I am made low full greatly. Deliver thou me from them that pur-sue me; for they be comforted on or over me.
PSA 142:7 Lead my soul out of keeping to acknowledge to thy name; just [[or rightwise]] men abide me, till thou yield to me.
PSA 143:1 The psalm of David. Lord, hear thou my prayer, with ears perceive thou my beseeching; in thy truth hear thou me, in thy rightwiseness.
PSA 143:2 And enter thou not into doom with thy servant; for each man living shall not be made just [[or justified]] in thy sight.
PSA 143:3 For the enemy pursued my soul; he made low my life in [[the]] earth. He hath set me in dark places, as the dead men of the world,
PSA 143:4 and my spirit was anguished on me; mine heart was troubled in me.
PSA 143:5 I was mindful of eld [[or old]] days, I bethought in all thy works; I be-thought in the deeds of thine hands.
PSA 143:6 I held forth mine hands to thee; my soul was as earth without water to thee.
PSA 143:7 Lord, hear thou me swiftly; my spirit failed. Turn thou not away thy face from me; and I shall be like them that go down into the pit.
PSA 143:8 Make thou early thy mercy heard to me; for I hoped in thee. Make thou known to me the way in which I shall go; for I raised my soul to thee.
PSA 143:9 Deliver thou me from mine enemies; Lord, I fled to thee;
PSA 143:10 teach thou me to do thy will, for thou art my God. Thy good spirit shall lead me forth into a rightful [[or right]] land;
PSA 143:11 Lord, for thy name thou shalt quicken me in thine equity. Thou shalt lead my soul out of tribulation;
PSA 143:12 and in thy mercy thou shalt scatter mine enemies. And thou shalt lose all them, that trouble my soul; for I am thy servant.
PSA 144:1 A psalm of David. Blessed be my Lord God, that teacheth mine hands to war; and my fingers to battle.
PSA 144:2 My mercy, and my refuge; my taker-up, and my deliverer. My defender, and I hoped in him; and thou makest subject my people under me.
PSA 144:3 Lord, what is a man, for thou hast made thyself known to him; either the son of man, for thou areckonest him of some value?
PSA 144:4 A man is made like vanity; his days pass as a shadow.
PSA 144:5 Lord, bow down thine heavens, and come thou down; touch thou [[the]] hills, and they shall make smoke.
PSA 144:6 Light thou shining, and thou shalt scatter them; send thou out thine arrows, and thou shalt trouble them.
PSA 144:7 Send out thine hand from on high, ravish me out, and deliver thou me from many waters; and from the hand of alien sons.
PSA 144:8 The mouth of whom spake vanity; and the right hand of them is the right hand of wickedness.
PSA 144:9 God, I shall sing to thee a new song; I shall say psalm to thee in psaltery of ten strings.
PSA 144:10 Which givest health to kings, which again-boughtest David, thy servant; from the wicked sword ravish thou out me.
PSA 144:11 And deliver thou me from the hand of alien sons; the mouth of which spake vanity, and the right hand of them is the right hand of wickedness.
PSA 144:12 Whose sons be as new plantings in their youth. The daughters of them be arrayed; adorned about as the likeness of a temple.
PSA 144:13 The cellars of them be full; bring-ing out from this vessel into that, or from one vessel into another. The sheep of them be with lambs, plenteous [[or abounding]] in their goings out;
PSA 144:14 their kine be fat. There is no falling of their wall, neither passing over of it; neither cry is in the streets of them.
PSA 144:15 They said, The people is blessed, that hath these things; blessed is the people, whose Lord is the God of it.
PSA 145:1 The psalm of David. My God, king, I shall enhance thee; and I shall bless thy name into the world, and into the world of world.
PSA 145:2 By all days I shall bless thee; and I shall praise thy name into the world, and into the world of the world.
PSA 145:3 The Lord is great, and worthy to be praised full much; and none end there is of his greatness.
PSA 145:4 Generation and generation shall praise thy works; and they shall pro-nounce, either tell afar, thy power.
PSA 145:5 They shall speak of the magnifi-cence of the glory of thine holiness; and they shall tell of all thy marvels.
PSA 145:6 And they shall say of the strength of thy fearedful things; and they shall tell of thy greatness.
PSA 145:7 They shall bring forth the mind of the abundance of thy sweetness; and they shall tell with full out joying of thy rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]].
PSA 145:8 The Lord is a merciful doer and merciful in will; patient, and much merciful.
PSA 145:9 The Lord is sweet in all things; and his merciful doings be above all his works.
PSA 145:10 Lord, all thy works acknowledge to thee; and thy saints bless thee.
PSA 145:11 They shall say [[of]] the glory of thy realm; and they shall speak of thy power.
PSA 145:12 That they make thy power known to the sons of men; and the glory of the magnificence of thy realm.
PSA 145:13 Thy realm is the realm of all worlds; and thy lordship is in all generation and into generation. The Lord is faithful in all his words; and holy in all his works.
PSA 145:14 The Lord lifteth up all that fall down; and raiseth up all men hurtled down.
PSA 145:15 Lord, the eyes of all beasts hope in thee; and thou givest the meat of them in covenable time.
PSA 145:16 Thou openest thine hand; and thou [[ful]] fillest each beast with blessing.
PSA 145:17 The Lord is just [[or rightwise]] in all his ways; and holy in all his works.
PSA 145:18 The Lord is nigh to all that inward-ly call him; to all that inwardly call him in truth.
PSA 145:19 He shall do the will of them, that dread him; and he shall hear the beseeching of them, and he shall make them safe.
PSA 145:20 The Lord keepeth all men loving him; and he shall lose all sinners.
PSA 145:21 My mouth shall speak the praising of the Lord; and each man bless his holy name into the world, and into the world of world.
PSA 146:1 Alleluia. My soul, praise thou the Lord;
PSA 146:2 I shall praise the Lord in my life; I shall sing to my God as long as I shall be.
PSA 146:3 Do not ye trust in princes; neither in the sons of men, in whom is no health.
PSA 146:4 The spirit of him shall go out, and he shall turn again into his earth; in that day all the thoughts of them shall perish.
PSA 146:5 He is blessed, of whom the God of Jacob is his helper; his hope is in his Lord God,
PSA 146:6 that made heaven, and earth; the sea, and all things that be in those [[or them]]. Which keepeth truth into the world,
PSA 146:7 he maketh doom to them that suffer wrong; he giveth meat to them that be hungry. The Lord unbindeth fettered men;
PSA 146:8 the Lord lighteneth blind men. The Lord raiseth men hurled or hurtled down; the Lord loveth just men.
PSA 146:9 The Lord keepeth comelings; he shall take up a motherless child, and a widow; and he shall destroy the ways of sinners.
PSA 146:10 The Lord shall reign into the worlds; Zion, thy God shall reign in generation and into generation.
PSA 147:1 Alleluia. Praise ye the Lord, for the psalm is good; let our praising be merry, and fair to our God.
PSA 147:2 The Lord shall build [[up]] Jerusalem; and he shall gather together the scatterings of Israel.
PSA 147:3 The which Lord maketh whole men contrite in heart; and bindeth together the sorrows of them.
PSA 147:4 Which numbereth the multitude of stars; and calleth names to all those [[or them]].
PSA 147:5 Our Lord is great, and his virtue is great; and of his wisdom there is no number.
PSA 147:6 The Lord taketh up mild men; forsooth he maketh low sinners till to the earth.
PSA 147:7 Before sing ye to the Lord in acknowledging; say ye psalm to our God in an harp.
PSA 147:8 Which covereth heaven with clouds; and maketh ready rain to the earth. Which bringeth forth hay in hills; and herb to the service of men.
PSA 147:9 Which giveth meat to their work beasts; and to the birds of crows calling him.
PSA 147:10 He shall not have will in the strength of an horse; neither it shall be well pleasant [[or well pleased]] to him in the legs of a man.
PSA 147:11 It is well pleasant [[or well pleased]] to the Lord on men that dread him; and in them that hope in his mercy.
PSA 147:12 Jerusalem, praise thou the Lord; Zion, praise thou thy God.
PSA 147:13 For he hath comforted the locks of thy gates; he hath blessed thy sons in thee.
PSA 147:14 Which hath set thy coasts peace; and filleth thee with the fatness of wheat.
PSA 147:15 Which sendeth out his speech to the earth; his word runneth swiftly.
PSA 147:16 Which giveth snow as wool; he spreadeth abroad a cloud as ashes.
PSA 147:17 He sendeth his crystal as morsels; who shall be able to suffer before the face of his coldness?
PSA 147:18 He shall send out his word, and shall melt those [[or them]]; his spirit shall blow, and waters shall flow.
PSA 147:19 Which telleth his word to Jacob; and his rightfulnesses and dooms to Israel.
PSA 147:20 He did not so to each nation; and he showed not his dooms to them.
PSA 148:1 Alleluia. Ye of heavens, praise the Lord; praise ye him in high things.
PSA 148:2 All his angels, praise ye him; all his virtues, praise ye him.
PSA 148:3 Sun and moon, praise ye him; all stars and light, praise ye him.
PSA 148:4 Heavens of heavens, praise ye him; and the waters that be above heavens,
PSA 148:5 praise they the name of the Lord. For he said, and things were made; he commanded, and things were made of nought.
PSA 148:6 He ordained those things into the world, and into the world of world; he setted a commandment, and it shall not pass.
PSA 148:7 Ye of the earth, praise the Lord; dragons, and all depths of waters.
PSA 148:8 Fire, hail, snow, ice, spirits of tempests; that do his word.
PSA 148:9 Mountains, and all little hills; trees bearing fruit, and all cedars.
PSA 148:10 Wild beasts, and all tame beasts; serpents, and feathered birds.
PSA 148:11 The kings of earth, and all peoples; the princes, and all judges of earth.
PSA 148:12 Young men, and virgins, eld [[or old]] men with [[the]] younger,
PSA 148:13 praise the name of the Lord; for the name of him alone is enhanced. His acknowledging be on heaven and earth;
PSA 148:14 and he hath enhanced the horn of his people. An hymn be to all his saints; to the children of Israel, to a people nighing to him.
PSA 149:1 Alleluia. Sing ye to the Lord a new song; his praising be in the church of saints.
PSA 149:2 Israel be glad in him that made him; and the daughters of Zion make full out joy in their king.
PSA 149:3 Praise they his name in a quire or choir; say they psalm to him in a tympan, and psaltery.
PSA 149:4 For the Lord is well pleased in his people; and he hath raised mild men into health.
PSA 149:5 Saints shall make full out joy in glory; they shall be glad in their beds.
PSA 149:6 The full out joyings of God in the throat of them; and swords sharp on both sides in the hands of them.
PSA 149:7 To do vengeance in nations; and blamings in peoples.
PSA 149:8 To bind the kings of them in stocks; and the noble men of them in iron manacles.
PSA 149:9 That they make in them the doom written; this is the glory to all his saints.
PSA 150:1 Alleluia. Praise ye the Lord in his saints; praise ye him in the firmament of his virtue.
PSA 150:2 Praise ye him in his virtues; praise ye him by the multitude of his greatness.
PSA 150:3 Praise ye him in the sound of a trump; praise ye him in a psaltery and harp.
PSA 150:4 Praise ye him in a tympan and quire; praise ye him in strings and organ.
PSA 150:5 Praise ye him in cymbals sounding well, praise ye him in cymbals of jubilation;
PSA 150:6 each spirit, praise the Lord.
JER 1:1 The words of Jeremy, son of Hilkiah, of the priests that were in Anathoth, in the land of Benjamin.
JER 1:2 For the word of the Lord was made to him in the days of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his realm.
JER 1:3 And it was done in the days of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, unto the ending of the eleventh year of Zedekiah, son of Josiah, king of Judah, till to the passing over, either captivity, of Jerusalem, in the fifth month.
JER 1:4 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and said,
JER 1:5 Before that I formed thee in the womb, I knew thee; and before that thou wentest out of the womb, I hallowed thee; and I gave thee to be a prophet among folks.
JER 1:6 And I said, A! A! A! Lord God, lo! I cannot speak, for I am a child.
JER 1:7 And the Lord said to me, Do not thou say, that I am a child; for thou shalt go to all things, to which I shall send thee, and thou shalt speak all things, whatever things I shall command to thee.
JER 1:8 Dread thou not of the face of them; for I am with thee, to deliver thee, saith the Lord.
JER 1:9 And the Lord sent his hand, and touched my mouth; and the Lord said to me, Lo! I have given my words in thy mouth;
JER 1:10 lo! I have ordained thee today on folks, and on realms, that thou draw up, and destroy, and lose, and scatter, and build, and plant.
JER 1:11 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and said, What seest thou, Jeremy? And I said, I see a rod waking or watching.
JER 1:12 And the Lord said to me, Thou hast seen well, for I shall wake or watch on my word, to do it.
JER 1:13 And the word of the Lord was made the second time to me, and said, What seest thou? [[And I said]], I see a pot boiling, and the face thereof from the face of the north.
JER 1:14 And the Lord said to me, From the north shall be showed all evil on all the dwellers of the land.
JER 1:15 For lo! I shall call together all the nations of [[the]] realms of the north, saith the Lord; and they shall come, and set each man his seat in the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, and on all the walls thereof in compass, and on all the cities of Judah.
JER 1:16 And I shall speak my dooms with them on all the malice of them, that forsook me, and made sacrifice to alien gods, and worshipped the work of their hands.
JER 1:17 Therefore gird [[up]] thou thy loins, and rise thou, and speak to them all things which I command to thee; dread thou not of the face of them, for I shall not make thee for to dread the cheer of them.
JER 1:18 For I gave thee today into a strong city, and into an iron pillar, and into a brazen wall, on all the land, to the kings of Judah, and to the princes thereof, and to the priests thereof, and to all the people of the land.
JER 1:19 And they shall fight against thee, and they shall not have the mastery; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, that I deliver thee.
JER 2:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and said,
JER 2:2 Go thou, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, and say, The Lord saith these things, I had mind on thee, and I had mercy on thee in thy young waxing age, and on the charity of thy espousing, when thou followedest me in desert, in the land which is not sown.
JER 2:3 Israel was holy to the Lord, the first of fruits of him; men that devour that Israel, trespass; evils shall come [[up]] on them, saith the Lord.
JER 2:4 The house of Jacob, and all the lineages of the house of Israel, hear ye the word of the Lord.
JER 2:5 The Lord saith these things, What of wickedness found your fathers in me, for they went far away from me, and went after vanity, and were made vain?
JER 2:6 And they said not, Where is the Lord, that made us to go up from the land of Egypt, that led us over through desert, by the land unhabitable and without way, by the land of thirst, and by the image of death, by the land in which a man went not, neither a man dwelled.
JER 2:7 And I brought you into the land of Carmel, that ye should eat the fruit thereof, and the goods thereof; and ye entered, and defouled my land, and setted mine heritage into abomination.
JER 2:8 Priests said not, Where is the Lord? and they that held the law, knew not me; and shepherds trespassed against me, and prophets prophesied in Baal, and followed idols.
JER 2:9 Therefore yet I shall strive with you in doom, saith the Lord, and I shall dispute with your sons.
JER 2:10 Go ye to the isles of Chittim, and see ye; and send ye into Kedar, and behold ye greatly; and see ye, if such a thing is done,
JER 2:11 if a folk changed his gods; and certainly they be no gods; but my people changed his glory into an idol.
JER 2:12 Heavens, be ye astonied on this thing, and, ye gates of heaven, be ye desolate greatly, saith the Lord.
JER 2:13 For why my people hath done twain [[or two]] evils; they have forsaken me, the well of quick water, and have digged to them cisterns, that were destroyed, that may not hold waters.
JER 2:14 Whether Israel is a bondman, either is born bond? Why therefore is he made into prey?
JER 2:15 Lions roared on him, and gave their voice; they have set the land of him into wilderness, the cities of him be burnt [[up]], and none there is that dwelleth in those [[or them]].
JER 2:16 Also the sons of Memphis and Tahpanhes have defouled thee, unto the top of the head.
JER 2:17 Whether this is not done to thee, for thou forsookest thy Lord God, in that time in which he led thee by the way?
JER 2:18 And now what wilt thou to thee in the way of Egypt, that thou drink troubled water? And what is to thee with the way of Assyrians, that thou drink water of the flood?
JER 2:19 Thy malice shall reprove thee, and thy turning away shall blame thee; know thou and see, that it is evil and bitter, that thou hast forsaken thy Lord God, and that his dread is not at thee, saith the Lord God of hosts.
JER 2:20 From the world thou hast broken my yoke, thou hast broken my bonds, and saidest, I shall not serve. For thou whore didest whoredom in each high little hill, and under each tree full of boughs.
JER 2:21 Forsooth I planted thee a chosen vinery [[or vine]], all true seed; how therefore art thou, an alien vinery [[or vine]], turned to me into a shrewd thing?
JER 2:22 Though thou wash thee with fuller’s clay, and multipliest to thee the [[cleansing]] herb boreth, thou art defouled in thy wickedness before me, saith the Lord God.
JER 2:23 How sayest thou, I am not defouled, I went not after Baalim? See thy ways in the great valley, know thou what thou hast done; a swift runner ordaining his ways.
JER 2:24 A wild ass accustomable in wilderness, drew the wind of his love in the desire of his soul; no man shall turn away it. All that seek it, shall not fail; they shall find it in the flux of unclean blood thereof.
JER 2:25 Forbid thy foot from nakedness, and thy throat from thirst; and thou saidest, I despaired, I shall not do; for I loved burningly alien gods, and I shall go after them.
JER 2:26 As a thief is shamed, when he is taken, so the house of Israel be shamed; they, and [[the]] kings of them, the princes, and priests, and the prophets of them,
JER 2:27 that say to a tree, Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou hast engendered me. They turned to me the back, and not the face; and in the time of their torment they shall say, Rise thou, and deliver us.
JER 2:28 Where be thy gods, which thou madest to thee? Rise they, and deliver thee in the time of thy torment; for after the number of thy cities were thy gods, thou Judah.
JER 2:29 What, will ye strive with me in doom? All ye have forsaken me, saith the Lord.
JER 2:30 In vain I smote your sons, they received not chastising; your sword devoured your prophets, your gener-ation is destroyed as a lion.
JER 2:31 See ye the word of the Lord, whether I am made a wilderness to Israel, either a land late bringing forth fruit? Why therefore said my people, We have gone away, we shall no more come to thee?
JER 2:32 Whether a virgin shall forget her ornament? and a spousess her breast-girdle? But my people hath forgotten me by days without number.
JER 2:33 What enforcest or endeavourest thou to show thy way good to seek love, which furthermore both hast taught thy malices thy ways,
JER 2:34 and the blood of poor men and innocents is found in thy wings? I found not them in ditches, but in all things which I remembered before.
JER 2:35 And thou saidest, I am without sin and innocent; and therefore thy strong vengeance be turned away from me. Lo! I shall strive with thee in doom; for thou saidest, I sinned not.
JER 2:36 How vile art thou made, rehearsing thy ways? and thou shalt be shamed of Egypt, as thou were shamed of Assur.
JER 2:37 For why and thou shalt go out of this land, and thine hands shall be on thine head; for why the Lord hath all-broken thy trust, and thou shalt have nothing to prosperity.
JER 3:1 It is said commonly, If a man forsaketh his wife, and she go away from him, and be wedded to another husband, whether he shall turn again [[any]] more to her? whether that woman shall not be defouled, and made unclean? Forsooth thou hast done fornication with many lovers; nevertheless turn thou again to me, saith the Lord, and I shall receive thee.
JER 3:2 Raise thine eyes into straight, and see, where thou art not cast down. Thou hast sat in ways, abiding them as a thief in wilderness, and thou hast defouled the earth in thy fornications and in thy malices.
JER 3:3 Wherefore the drops of rains were forbidden, and no late rain was. The forehead of a woman whore is made to thee; thou wouldest not be ashamed.
JER 3:4 Namely from this time forth call thou me, Thou art my father, the leader of my virginity.
JER 3:5 Whether thou shalt be wroth without end, either shalt continue into the end? Lo! thou hast spoken, and hast done evils, and thou were mighty. And for words of penance thou blasphemedest by words of pride; and thou filledest thine evil thought, and showedest thy strength against thy husband, that thou mayest do that thing that thou treatedest by word.
JER 3:6 And the Lord said to me, in the days of Josiah, the king, Whether thou hast seen what thing the adversary, Israel, hath done? She went [[away]] to herself on each high hill, and under each tree full of boughs, and did fornication there.
JER 3:7 And I said, when she had done all these things, Turn thou again to me; and she turned not again. And her sister, Judah, breaker of the law, saw,
JER 3:8 that for the adversary, Israel, did adultery, I had let her go, and I had given to her a libel, or a little book, of forsaking; and Judah, her sister, breaker of the law, dreaded not, but also she went, and did fornication.
JER 3:9 And by lightness of her fornication she defouled the earth, and did adultery with a stone, and with a tree.
JER 3:10 And in all these things her sister, Judah, breaker of the law, turned not again to me, in all her heart, but in a leasing, saith the Lord God.
JER 3:11 And the Lord said to me, The adversary, Israel, hath justified her soul, in comparison of Judah, breaker of the law.
JER 3:12 Go thou, and cry these words against the north; and thou shalt say, Thou adversary, Israel, turn again, saith the Lord, and I shall not turn away my face from you; for I am holy, saith the Lord, and I shall not be wroth without end.
JER 3:13 Nevertheless know thou thy wickedness; for thou hast trespassed against thy Lord God, and thou hast spread abroad thy ways to aliens under each tree full of boughs; and thou heardest not my voice, saith the Lord.
JER 3:14 Be ye converted, sons, turning again, saith the Lord, for I am your husband; and I shall take you, one of a city, and twain [[or two]] of a kindred, and I shall lead you into Zion;
JER 3:15 and I shall give to you shepherds after mine heart, and they shall feed you with knowing and teaching.
JER 3:16 And when ye shall be multiplied, and increase in the land, in those days, saith the Lord, they shall no more say, The ark of [[the]] testament of the Lord; neither it shall ascend [[or go up]] on the heart, neither they shall think on it, neither it shall be visited, neither it shall be further.
JER 3:17 In that time they shall call Jerusalem The seat of the Lord, and all heathen men shall be gathered together to it, in the name of the Lord, in Jerusalem; and they shall not go after the shrewdness of their worst heart.
JER 3:18 In those days the house of Judah shall go to the house of Israel; and they shall come together from the land of the north to the land which I gave to your fathers.
JER 3:19 Forsooth I said, How shall I set [[or put]] thee among sons, and shall give to thee a desirable land, a full clear heritage of the hosts of heathen men? And I said, Thou shalt call me, Father, and thou shalt not cease to enter after me.
JER 3:20 But as if a woman despiseth her lover, so the house of Israel despised me, saith the Lord.
JER 3:21 A voice is heard in ways, the weeping and yelling of the sons of Israel; for they made wicked their way, they forgat their Lord God.
JER 3:22 Be ye converted, sons, turning again, and I shall heal your turnings away. Lo! we come to thee; for thou art our Lord God.
JER 3:23 Verily the little hills were liars, the multitude of mountains was false; verily in our Lord God is the health of Israel.
JER 3:24 Shame ate the travail of our fathers, from our youth; shame ate the flocks of them, and the droves of them, the sons of them, and the daughters of them.
JER 3:25 We shall sleep in our shame, and our shame shall cover us; for we sinned to our Lord God, both we and our fathers, from our youth unto this day; and we have not heard the voice of our Lord God.
JER 4:1 Israel, if thou turnest again, saith the Lord, turn thou to me; if thou takest away thine offendings from my face, thou shalt not be moved.
JER 4:2 And thou shalt swear, The Lord liveth, in truth, and in doom, and in rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]]; and all folks shall bless him, and shall praise him.
JER 4:3 For the Lord God saith these things to a man of Judah, and to a dweller of Jerusalem, Make ye new to you a land tilled of new, either a fallow, and do not ye sow on thorns.
JER 4:4 Men of Judah, and dwellers of Jerusalem, be ye circumcised to the Lord, and do ye away the prepuces, either filths, of your hearts; lest peradventure mine indignation go out as fire, and be kindled, and none there be that quench, for the malice of your thoughts.
JER 4:5 Tell ye in Judah, and make ye heard in Jerusalem; speak ye, and sing ye with a trump in the land; cry ye strongly, and say ye, Be ye gathered together, and enter we into [[the]] strong cities.
JER 4:6 Raise ye a sign in Zion, comfort ye, and do not ye stand; for I [[shall]] bring evil from the north, and a great sorrow.
JER 4:7 A lion shall go up from his den, and the robber of folks shall raise himself. He is gone out of his place, to set thy land into wilderness; thy cities shall be destroyed, abiding still without dweller.
JER 4:8 On this thing gird you with hair-shirts; wail ye, and yell, for the wrath of the strong vengeance of the Lord is not turned away from you.
JER 4:9 And it shall be, in that day, saith the Lord, the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of princes; and the priests shall wonder, and the prophets shall be astonied.
JER 4:10 And I said, Alas! alas! alas! Lord God; therefore whether thou hast deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, Peace shall be to you, and lo! a sword is come unto the soul?
JER 4:11 In that time it shall be said to this people and to Jerusalem, A burning wind in the ways that be in desert, be the ways of the daughter of my people, not to winnow, and not to purge.
JER 4:12 A spirit full of them shall come to me; and now I, but I shall speak my dooms with them.
JER 4:13 Lo! he shall ascend [[or go up]] as a cloud, and his chariots as a tempest; his horses be swifter than eagles; woe to us, for we be destroyed.
JER 4:14 Thou Jerusalem, wash thine heart from malice, that thou be made safe. How long shall harmful thoughts dwell in thee?
JER 4:15 For why the voice of a teller from Dan, and making known an idol from the hill or mount of Ephraim.
JER 4:16 Raise, ye folks; lo! it is heard in Jerusalem, that keepers be come from a far land, and give their voice on the cities of Judah.
JER 4:17 As the keepers of fields, they be made on it in compass; for it stirred me to wrathfulness [[or to wrath]], saith the Lord.
JER 4:18 Thy ways and thy thoughts have made this to thee; this malice of thee, for it is bitter, for it touched thine heart.
JER 4:19 My womb acheth, my womb acheth; the wits of mine heart be troubled in me. I shall not be still, for my soul heard the voice of a trump, the cry of battle.
JER 4:20 Sorrow is called on sorrow, and all the land is destroyed; my taber-nacles be wasted suddenly, my skins be wasted suddenly.
JER 4:21 How long shall I see them that flee, shall I hear the voice of a clarion?
JER 4:22 For my fond [[or foolish]] people knew not me; they be unwise sons, and cowards; they be wise to do evils, but they know not to do well.
JER 4:23 I beheld the land, and lo! it was void, and nought; and I beheld heavens, and no light there was in them.
JER 4:24 I saw mountains, and lo! they were moved, and all little hills were troubled.
JER 4:25 I looked, and no man there was, and each bird of heaven was gone away.
JER 4:26 I beheld, and lo! Carmel is forsaken, and all cities thereof be destroyed from the face of the Lord, and from the face of the ire [[or the wrath]] of his strong vengeance.
JER 4:27 For the Lord saith these things, All the land shall be forsaken, but nevertheless, I shall not make a [[full]] ending.
JER 4:28 The earth shall mourn, and heavens above shall make sorrow, for that I spake; I thought, and it repented not me, neither I am turned away from it.
JER 4:29 Each city fled from the voice of a knight, and a man shooting an arrow; they entered into hard places, and ascended [[or went up]] into rocks of stone; all [[the]] cities be forsaken, and no man dwelleth in them.
JER 4:30 But what shalt thou destroyed, do? When thou shalt clothe thee with red scarlet, when thou shalt be adorned with a golden brooch, and shalt anoint thine eyes with woman’s ointment, thou shalt be arrayed in vain; thy lovers have despised thee, they shall seek thy soul.
JER 4:31 For I heard a voice as a woman travailing of child, the anguishes as of a woman childing; the voice of the daughter of Zion among them that die, and spread abroad her hands; Woe to me, for my soul failed for them that be slain.
JER 5:1 Compass ye the ways of Jerusalem, and look, and behold ye, and seek ye in the streets thereof, whether ye find a man doing doom, and seeking faith; and I shall be merciful to them.
JER 5:2 That if also they say, The Lord liveth, yea, they shall swear this falsely.
JER 5:3 Lord, thine eyes behold faith; thou hast smitten them, and they made not sorrow; thou hast all-broken them, and they forsook to take chastising; they made their faces harder than a stone, and would not turn again.
JER 5:4 Forsooth I said, In hap they be poor men, and fools, that know not the way of the Lord, and the doom of their God.
JER 5:5 Therefore I shall go to the principal men, and I shall speak to them; for they knew the way of the Lord, and the doom of their God. And lo! they have more broken together the yoke, and have broken [[the]] bonds.
JER 5:6 Therefore a lion of the wood smote them; a wolf at eventide wasted them, a leopard waking or watching on the cities of them. Each man that goeth out of them, shall be taken; for the trespassings of them be multiplied, the turnings away of them be comforted.
JER 5:7 On what thing may I be merciful to thee? Thy sons have forsaken me, and swear by them that be not gods. I [[full-]]filled them, and they did adultery, and in the house of an whore they did lechery.
JER 5:8 They be made horses, and stallions, lovers to women; each man neighed to the wife of his neighbour.
JER 5:9 Whether I shall not visit on these things, saith the Lord, and shall not my soul take vengeance on such a folk?
JER 5:10 Go ye up on the walls thereof, and destroy ye; but do not ye make an ending. Do ye away the scions thereof, for they be not servants of the Lord.
JER 5:11 For why the house of Israel and the house of Judah hath trespassed by trespassing against me, saith the Lord;
JER 5:12 they denied the Lord, and said, He is not, neither evil shall come [[up]] on us; we shall not see sword and hunger.
JER 5:13 The prophets spake against the wind, and none answer was in them; therefore these things shall come to them.
JER 5:14 The Lord God of hosts saith these things, For ye spake this word, lo! I give my words in thy mouth into fire, and this people into trees, and it shall devour them.
JER 5:15 Lo! thou house of Israel, saith the Lord, I shall bring on you a folk from [[a]] far; a strong folk, an eld [[or old]] folk, a folk whose language thou shalt not know, neither shalt understand what it speaketh.
JER 5:16 The arrow case thereof is as an open sepulchre; all be strong men.
JER 5:17 And it shall eat thy corns, and it shall devour thy bread, thy sons and thy daughters; it shall eat thy flock, and thy droves, it shall eat also thy vinery [[or vines]], and thy fig tree; it shall all-break thy strong cities with sword, in which thou hast trusted.
JER 5:18 Nevertheless in those days, saith the Lord, I shall not make you into [[full]] ending.
JER 5:19 That if ye say, Why hath our Lord God done all these things to us? thou shalt say to them, As ye forsook me, and served an alien god in your land, so ye shall serve alien gods in a land not yours.
JER 5:20 Tell ye this to the house of Jacob, and make ye heard in Judah, and say ye,
JER 5:21 Hear, thou fond [[or foolish]] people, that hast none heart; which have eyes, and see not, and ears, and hear not.
JER 5:22 Therefore shall not ye dread me, saith the Lord, and shall not ye make sorrow for my face? Which have set gravel to be a term, either end, to the sea, an everlasting commandment, which it shall not pass; and the waves thereof shall be moved, and shall not have power; and shall wax great, and shall not pass it.
JER 5:23 Forsooth an heart unbelieveful and stirring to wrath is made to this people; they departed, and went away,
JER 5:24 and they said not in their heart, Dread we our Lord God, that giveth to us rain timeful, and lateful in his time; that keepeth to us the plenty of harvest of the year.
JER 5:25 Your wickednesses did away these things, and your sins forbidded good from you.
JER 5:26 For there be found wicked men in my people, setting treason, as fowlers setting snares and traps, to take men.
JER 5:27 As a net, either a trap, full of birds, so the houses of them be full of guile.
JER 5:28 Therefore they be magnified, and made rich, made fat within, and made fat withoutforth, and they passed worst my words; they deemed not the cause of a widow, they dressed not the cause of a fatherless child, and they deemed not the doom of poor men.
JER 5:29 Whether I shall not visit on these things, saith the Lord, either shall not my soul take vengeance on such a folk?
JER 5:30 Wonder and marvelous things be made in the land;
JER 5:31 prophets prophesied leasing, and priests joyed with their hands, and my people loved such things. What therefore shall be done in the last thing thereof?
JER 6:1 Sons of Benjamin, be ye comforted in the middle of Jerusalem, and make ye noise with a clarion in Tekoa, and raise ye a banner on Bethhaccerem; for why evil and great sorrow is seen from the north.
JER 6:2 I have likened the daughter of Zion to a fair woman and delicate.
JER 6:3 Shepherds and their flocks shall come to it; they have pitched tents in it in compass; each man shall feed them, that be under his hand.
JER 6:4 Hallow ye battle on it. Rise ye together, and ascend we [[or go we up]] in midday. Woe to us, for the day hath bowed down, for shadows be made longer in the eventide.
JER 6:5 Rise ye, and ascend we [[or go we up]] in the night, and destroy we the houses thereof.
JER 6:6 For the Lord of hosts saith these things, Cut ye down the tree thereof, and shed ye earth about Jerusalem; this is the city of visitation; all false challenge is in the midst thereof.
JER 6:7 As a cistern maketh his water cold, so it made his malice cold; wickedness and destroying shall ever be heard therein before me, sickness and wound.
JER 6:8 Jerusalem, be thou taught, lest peradventure my soul go away from thee; lest peradventure I set thee forsaken, a land unhabitable.
JER 6:9 The Lord of hosts saith these things, They shall gather till to a raisin, they shall gather the remnants of Israel as in a vinery [[or a vine]]; turn thine hand, as a gatherer of grapes to the basket.
JER 6:10 To whom shall I speak, and to whom shall I say witnessing, that he hear? Lo! the ears of them be uncircumcised, and they may not hear; lo! the word of the Lord is made to them into despite, and they shall not receive it.
JER 6:11 Therefore I am full of the strong vengeance of the Lord, and I travailed suffering. Shed thou [[or Pour]] out vengeance on a little child withoutforth, and on the counsel of young men together; for a man with his wife shall be taken, and an eld [[or old]] man with him that is full of days.
JER 6:12 And the houses of them, the fields and wives together, shall go to other men; for I shall stretch forth mine hand on the dwellers of the land, saith the Lord.
JER 6:13 For from the less unto the greater, all study to avarice; and all do guile, from the prophet unto the priest.
JER 6:14 And they healed the sorrow of the daughter of my people with evil fame, saying, Peace, peace, and no peace was.
JER 6:15 They be shamed, that did abomination; yea, rather they were not shamed by confusion, and they could not be ashamed. Wherefore they shall fall down among them that shall fall down; they shall fall down in the time of their visitation, saith the Lord.
JER 6:16 The Lord saith these things, Stand ye on ways, and see ye, and ask ye of [[the]] eld [[or old]] paths, which is the good way; and go ye therein, and ye shall find refreshing to your souls. And they said, We shall not go.
JER 6:17 And I ordained espyers, either beholders, on you, and I said, Hear ye the voice of a trump. And they said, We shall not hear.
JER 6:18 Therefore, heathen men, hear ye, and, thou congregation, know, how great things I shall do to them.
JER 6:19 Thou earth, hear, lo! I shall bring evils on this people, the fruit of their thoughts; for they heard not my words, and casted away my law.
JER 6:20 Whereto bring ye to me incense from Sheba, and a tree of spicery smelling sweetly from a far land? Your burnt sacrifices be not accepted, and your slain sacrifices pleased not me.
JER 6:21 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall give fallings into this people, and fathers and sons together, a neighbour and kinsman, shall fall in them, and shall perish.
JER 6:22 The Lord God saith these things, Lo! a people cometh from the land of the north, and a great folk shall rise together from the ends of [[the]] earth.
JER 6:23 It shall take arrow and shield; it is cruel, and shall not have mercy; the voice thereof shall sound as the sea, and they made ready as a man to battle shall ascend [[or go up]] on horses against thee, thou daughter of Zion.
JER 6:24 We [[have]] heard the fame thereof, our hands be made numb; tribulation hath taken us, sorrows have taken us as a woman travailing of child.
JER 6:25 Do not ye go out to the fields, and go ye not in the way, for the sword of the enemy, dread in compass.
JER 6:26 The daughter of my people, be thou girded with hair-shirt, and be thou sprinkled together with ashes; make to thee mourning of [[the]] one alone begotten son, a bitter wailing, for why a waster shall come suddenly [[up]] on you.
JER 6:27 I gave thee to be a strong prover in my people, and thou shalt know, and prove the way of them.
JER 6:28 All these princes bowing away, going guilefully, be metal and iron; all be corrupt.
JER 6:29 The bellow failed, lead is wasted in the fire, the weller welled in vain; for the malices of them be not wasted.
JER 6:30 Call ye them reprovable silver, for the Lord hath cast them away.
JER 7:1 The word that was made of the Lord to Jeremy, and said,
JER 7:2 Stand in the gate of the house of the Lord, and preach there this word, and say, All Judah, that enter [[in]] by these gates for to worship the Lord, hear ye the word of the Lord.
JER 7:3 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Make ye good your ways, and your studies, and I shall dwell with you in this place.
JER 7:4 Do not ye trust in the words of leasing, and say, The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord is.
JER 7:5 For if ye bless your ways, and your studies; if ye do doom betwixt a man and his neighbour;
JER 7:6 if ye make not false challenge to a comeling, and to a fatherless child, and to a widow; neither shed out innocent blood in this place, and go not after alien gods, into evil to yourselves,
JER 7:7 I shall dwell with you in this place, in the land which I gave to your fathers, from the world and till into the world.
JER 7:8 Lo! ye trust to you in the words of leasing, that shall not profit to you;
JER 7:9 to steal, to slay, to do adultery, to swear falsely, to make sacrifice to Baalim, and to go after alien gods, which ye know not.
JER 7:10 And ye came, and stood before me in this house, in which my name is called to help; and ye said, We be delivered, for we have done all these abominations.
JER 7:11 Whether therefore this house, wherein my name is called to help before your eyes, is made a den of thieves? I, I am, I saw, saith the Lord.
JER 7:12 Go ye to my place in Shiloh, where my name dwelled at the beginning, and see ye what things I did to it, for the malice of my people Israel.
JER 7:13 And now, for ye have done all these works, saith the Lord, and I spake to you, and rose early, and I spake, and ye heard not, and I called you, and ye answered not;
JER 7:14 I shall do to this house, wherein my name is called to help, and in which house ye have trust, and to the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I did to Shiloh.
JER 7:15 And I shall cast you forth from my face, as I casted forth all your brethren, all the seed of Ephraim.
JER 7:16 Therefore do not thou pray for this people, neither take thou praising and prayer for them; and against-stand thou not me, for I shall not hear thee.
JER 7:17 Whether thou seest not, what these men do in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?
JER 7:18 The sons gather sticks, and the fathers kindle a fire; and women sprinkle together inner fatness, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, to make sacrifice to alien gods, and to stir me to wrathfulness [[or to wrath]].
JER 7:19 Whether they stir me to wrathful-ness [[or to wrath]]? saith the Lord; whether they stir not themselves into [[the]] shame of their cheer?
JER 7:20 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, Lo! my strong vengeance and mine indignation is welled together on this place, on men, and on beasts, and on the tree of the country, and on the fruits of [[the]] earth; and it shall be kindled, and it shall not be quenched.
JER 7:21 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Heap ye your burnt sacrifices to your slain sacrifices, and eat ye fleshes.
JER 7:22 For I spake not with your fathers, and I commanded not to them of the word of burnt sacrifices, and of slain sacrifices, in the day in which I led them out of the land of Egypt.
JER 7:23 But I commanded this word to them, and I said, Hear ye my voice, and I shall be God to you, and ye shall be a people to me; and go ye in all the way which I commanded to you, that it be well to you.
JER 7:24 And they heard not, neither bowed down their ear, but they went in their lusts, and in the shrewdness of their evil heart; and they be made behind, and not before,
JER 7:25 from the day in which their fathers went out of the land of Egypt till to this day. And I sent to you all my servants prophets, and I rose early by the day, and I sent.
JER 7:26 And they heard not me, neither bowed down their ear; but they made hard their noll, and wrought worse than the fathers of them.
JER 7:27 And thou shalt speak to them all these words, and they shall not hear thee; and thou shalt call them, and they shall not answer to thee.
JER 7:28 And thou shalt say to them, This is the folk, that heard not the voice of their Lord God, neither received chastising; faith perished, and is taken away from the mouth of them.
JER 7:29 Clip thine hair, and cast away, and take thou wailing straightly; for the Lord hath cast away, and hath forsaken the generation of his strong vengeance.
JER 7:30 For the sons of Judah have done evil before mine eyes, saith the Lord; they have set their offendings in the house, in which my name is called to help, that they should defoul that house;
JER 7:31 and they builded high things in Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, that they should burn their sons and their daughters by fire, which things I commanded not, neither thought in mine heart.
JER 7:32 Therefore lo! days come, saith the Lord, and it shall no more be said Tophet, and the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaying; and they shall bury in Tophet, for there is no place.
JER 7:33 And the dead carrion of this people shall be into meat to the birds of heaven, and to the beasts of earth; and none there shall be that shall drive away.
JER 7:34 And I shall make to cease the voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, and the voice of [[the]] spouse, and the voice of [[the]] spousess from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem; for the land shall be in desolation.
JER 8:1 In that time, saith the Lord, they shall cast out the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of princes thereof, and the bones of priests, and the bones of prophets, and the bones of them that dwelled in Jerusalem, from their sepulchres;
JER 8:2 and they shall lay abroad those bones to the sun, and [[the]] moon, and to all the knighthood of heaven, which they loved, and which they served, and after which they went, and which they sought, and worshipped; they shall not be gathered, and shall not be buried; they shall be into a dunghill on the face of [[the]] earth.
JER 8:3 And all men shall choose death more than life, which be residue, either left, of this worst kindred, in all places that be left, to which places I casted them out, saith the Lord of hosts.
JER 8:4 And thou shalt say to them, The Lord saith these things, Whether he that shall fall, shall not rise again? and whether he that is turned away, shall not turn again?
JER 8:5 Why therefore is this people in Jerusalem turned away by turning away full of strife? They have taken leasing, and would not turn again.
JER 8:6 I perceived, and hearkened; no man speaketh that that is good, none there is that doeth penance for his sin, and saith, What have I done? All be turned together to their course, as an horse going by fierceness to battle.
JER 8:7 A kite in the air knew his time; a turtle, and a swallow, and a ciconia, kept the time of their coming; but my people knew not the doom of the Lord,
JER 8:8 How say ye, We be wise men, and the law of the Lord is with us? Verily the false stylus, either writing, of scribes wrought leasing.
JER 8:9 [[The]] Wise men be shamed, they be made afeared and taken. For they cast away the word of the Lord, and no wisdom is in them.
JER 8:10 Therefore I shall give the women of them to strangers, and the fields of them to alien heirs; for from the least unto the most all follow avarice, from a prophet unto the priest all make leasing;
JER 8:11 and they healed the sorrow of the daughter of my people to shame, saying, Peace, peace, when no peace was.
JER 8:12 They be shamed, for they did abomination; yea, rather they were not shamed by shame, and could not be ashamed. Therefore they shall fall among fallers, in the time of their visitation they shall fall, saith the Lord.
JER 8:13 I gathering shall gather them, saith the Lord; no grape is in the vines, and figs be not in the fig tree; a leaf fell down, and I gave to them those things that be gone out over.
JER 8:14 Why sit we? come ye together, enter we into a strong city, and be we still there; for our Lord hath made us to be still, and gave to us drink the water of gall; for we have sinned to the Lord.
JER 8:15 We abided peace, and no good was; we abided time of medicine, and lo! dread is.
JER 8:16 [[The]] Gnashing of horses thereof is heard from Dan; all the land is moved of the voice of neighings of his warriors; and they came, and devoured the land, and the plenty thereof, the city, and the dwellers thereof.
JER 8:17 For lo! I shall send to you the worst serpents, to which is no charming; and they shall bite you, saith the Lord.
JER 8:18 My sorrow is on sorrow, mine heart is mourning in me.
JER 8:19 And lo! the voice of cry of the daughter of my people cometh from a far land. Whether the Lord is not in Zion, either the king thereof is not therein? Why therefore stirred they me to wrathfulness [[or to wrath]] by their graven images, and by alien vanities?
JER 8:20 Harvest is passed, summer is ended; and we be not saved.
JER 8:21 I am tormented, and sorry on the sorrow of the daughter of my people; astonishing held me.
JER 8:22 Whether resin, that is, a gum of great odour and medicinal, is not in Gilead, either a leech is not there? Why therefore the wound of the daughter of my people is not healed perfectly?
JER 9:1 Who shall give water to mine head, and a well of tears to mine eyes? And I shall beweep day and night the slain men of the daughter of my people.
JER 9:2 Who shall give me into a wilderness of diverse way-goers? And I shall forsake my people, and I shall go away from them. For why all be adulterers, and the companies of trespassers against the law;
JER 9:3 and they held forth their tongue as a bow of leasing, and not of truth. They be comforted in earth, for they went out from evil to evil, and they knew not me, saith the Lord.
JER 9:4 Each man keep him from his neighbour, and have no trust in any brother of him; for why each brother deceiving shall deceive, and each friend shall go guilefully.
JER 9:5 And a man shall scorn his brother, and shall not speak truth; for they taught their tongue to speak leasing; they travailed to do wickedly.
JER 9:6 Thy dwelling is in the midst of guile; in guile they forsook to know me, saith the Lord.
JER 9:7 Therefore the Lord of hosts saith these things, Lo! I shall well together, and I shall prove them; for why what other thing shall I do from the face of the daughter of my people?
JER 9:8 The tongue of them is an arrow wounding, and [[it]] spake guile; in his mouth he speaketh peace with his friend, and privily he setteth treasons to him.
JER 9:9 Whether I shall not visit on these things, saith the Lord, either shall not my soul take vengeance on such a folk?
JER 9:10 On hills [[or mountains]] I shall take weeping and mourning, and wailing on the fair things of desert, for they be burnt [[up]]; for no man is passing forth, and they heard not the voice of him that wieldeth; from a bird of the air unto [[the]] sheep, they passed over, and went away.
JER 9:11 And I shall give Jerusalem into heaps of gravel, and into dens of dragons; and I shall give the cities of Judah into desolation, for there is no dweller.
JER 9:12 Who is a wise man that shall understand these things, and to whom the word of the mouth of the Lord shall be made, that he tell this? Why the earth perished, it is burnt as desert, for none is that passeth?
JER 9:13 And the Lord said, For they forsook my law, which I gave to them, and they heard not my voice, and they went not therein;
JER 9:14 and they went after the shrewd-ness of their heart, and after Baalim, which they learned of their fathers;
JER 9:15 therefore the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Lo! I shall feed this people with wormwood, and I shall give to them drink the water of gall.
JER 9:16 And I shall scatter them among heathen men, which they and their fathers knew not; and I shall send sword after them, till they be wasted.
JER 9:17 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Behold ye, and call ye women that wail, and come they; and send ye to those women that be wise, and haste they.
JER 9:18 Haste they, and take they wailing on you; your eyes bring down tears, and your eyelids flow with waters;
JER 9:19 for the voice of wailing is heard from Zion. How be we destroyed, and shamed greatly? for we have forsaken the land, for our tabernacles be forsaken.
JER 9:20 Therefore, women, hear ye the word of the Lord, and your ears take the word of his mouth; and teach ye your daughters wailing, and each woman teach her neighbour mourning.
JER 9:21 For why death ascended [[or went up]] by your windows, it entered into your houses, to lose little children withoutforth, and young men from the streets.
JER 9:22 Speak thou, The Lord saith these things, And the dead body of a man shall fall down as a turd on the face of the country, and as hay behind the back of the mower, and none there is that gathereth.
JER 9:23 The Lord saith these things, A wise man have not glory in his wisdom, and a strong man have not glory in his strength, and a rich man have not glory in his riches;
JER 9:24 but he that hath glory, have glory in this, to know and know me, for I am the Lord, that do mercy, and doom, and rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] in [[the]] earth. For why these things please me, saith the Lord.
JER 9:25 Lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall visit on each man that hath prepuce uncircumcised;
JER 9:26 on Egypt, and on Judah, and on Edom, and on the sons of Ammon, and on Moab, and on all men that be clipped on long hair, and dwell in desert; for why all heathen men have prepuce, forsooth all the house of Israel be uncircumcised in heart.
JER 10:1 The house of Israel, hear ye the word which the Lord spake on you.
JER 10:2 The Lord saith these things, Do not ye learn after the ways of heathen men, and do not ye dread of the signs of heaven, which signs heathen men dread.
JER 10:3 For the laws of peoples be vain, for why the work of [[the]] hands of a craftsman hath cut down with an ax a tree of the forest.
JER 10:4 He made it fair with silver and gold; with nails and hammers he joined it together, that it be not loosed [[atwain]].
JER 10:5 Idols be made in the likeness of a palm tree, and shall not speak; those [[or they]] shall be taken and be borne, for those [[or they]] may not go; there-fore do not ye dread those [[or them]], for they may neither do evil, neither well.
JER 10:6 Lord, none is like thee; thou art great, and thy name is great in strength.
JER 10:7 A! thou king of folks, who shall not dread thee? for why honour is thine among all wise men of heathen men, and in all the realms of them none is like thee.
JER 10:8 They shall be proved unwise and fools together; the teaching of their vanity is a tree.
JER 10:9 Silver wrapped is brought from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz; it is the work of a craftsman, and of the hand of a worker in metal; jacinth and purple be the clothing of them; all these things be the work of workmen.
JER 10:10 Forsooth the Lord is very God; he is God living, and a king everlasting; the earth shall be moved together of his indignation, and heathen men shall not suffer the menacing of him [[or his threatening]].
JER 10:11 Therefore thus ye shall say to them, Gods that made not heaven and earth, perish from the earth, and from these things that be under heaven.
JER 10:12 He is God, that maketh the earth in his strength, that maketh ready the world in his wisdom, and stretcheth forth heavens by his prudence.
JER 10:13 At his voice he giveth the multitude of waters in heaven, and he raiseth [[up]] mists from the ends of earth; he maketh lightnings into rain, and leadeth out wind of his treasures/ of his treasuries.
JER 10:14 Each man is made a fool of [[his]] knowing, each craftsman is shamed in a graven image; for why that that he welled together is false, and no spirit is in them.
JER 10:15 Those [[or they]] be vain, and a work worthy of scorn; those [[or they]] shall perish in the time of their visitation.
JER 10:16 The part of Jacob is not like these [[or them]], for he that formed all things is God of Jacob, and Israel is the rod of his heritage; the Lord of hosts is name to him.
JER 10:17 Thou that dwellest in besieging, gather from the land thy shame;
JER 10:18 for the Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall cast away far the dwellers of the land in this while; and I shall give tribulation to them, so that they be not found.
JER 10:19 Woe to me on my sorrow, my wound is full evil; forsooth I said, Plainly this is my sickness, and I shall bear it.
JER 10:20 My tabernacle is destroyed, all my ropes be broken; my sons went out from me, and be not; none is that shall stretch forth more my tent, and shall raise [[up]] my skins.
JER 10:21 For the shepherds did follily, and sought not the Lord; therefore they understood not, and all the flock of them is scattered.
JER 10:22 Lo! the voice of hearing cometh, and a great moving together from the land of the north, that it set the cities of Judah into wilderness, and a dwelling place of dragons.
JER 10:23 Lord, I know, that the way of a man is not of him, neither it is of a man that he go, and dress his steps.
JER 10:24 Lord, chastise thou me; never-theless in doom, and not in thy strong vengeance, lest peradventure thou drive me to nought.
JER 10:25 Pour out thine indignation on heathen men that knew not thee, and on provinces that called not thy name to help; for they ate Jacob, and devoured him, and wasted him, and destroyed the honour of him.
JER 11:1 The word that was made of the Lord to Jeremy, and said,
JER 11:2 Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak ye to the men of Judah, and to the dwellers of Jerusalem;
JER 11:3 and thou shalt say to them, The Lord God of Israel saith these things, Cursed be the man that heareth not the words of this covenant,
JER 11:4 which I commanded to your fathers, in the day in which I led them out of the land of Egypt, from the iron furnace; and I said, Hear ye my voice, and do ye all things which I commanded to you, and ye shall be into a people to me, and I shall be into God to you;
JER 11:5 that I raise the oath which I swore to your fathers, that I should give to them a land flowing with milk and honey, as this day is. And I answered, and said, Amen, Lord.
JER 11:6 And the Lord said to me, Cry thou [[out]] all these words in the cities of Judah, and without[[forth]] Jerusalem, and say thou, Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do ye them;
JER 11:7 for I witnessing have witnessed to your fathers, in the day in which I led them out of the land of Egypt, unto this day; I rose early, and witnessed, and said, Hear ye my voice.
JER 11:8 And they heard not, neither bowed down their ear, but they went forth each man in the shrewdness of his evil heart; and I brought in on them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded that they should do, and they did not.
JER 11:9 And the Lord said to me, Swearing together is found in the men of Judah, and in the dwellers of Jerusalem;
JER 11:10 they turned again to the former wickednesses of their fathers, that would not hear my words; and therefore these men went after alien gods, for to serve them; the house of Israel and the house of Judah made void my covenant, which I made with the fathers of them.
JER 11:11 Wherefore the Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall bring in on them evils, of which they shall not be able to go out; and they shall cry to me, and I shall not hear them.
JER 11:12 And the cities of Judah and the dwellers of Jerusalem shall go, and shall cry to them to which they offer sacrifices; and they shall not save them in the time of their torment.
JER 11:13 For thou, Judah, thy gods were by the number of thy cities, and thou settedest altars of shame, by the number of the ways of Jerusalem, altars to offer sacrifices to Baalim.
JER 11:14 Therefore do not thou pray for this people, and take thou not praising and prayer for them; for I shall not hear in the time of the cry of them to me, in the time of the torment of them.
JER 11:15 What is it, that my darling doeth many great trespasses in mine house? whether holy fleshes shall do away from thee thy malice, in which thou hast glory?
JER 11:16 The Lord called thy name an olive tree, fair, full of fruit, shapely; at the voice of a great speech, fire burnt on high therein, and the bushes thereof be burnt.
JER 11:17 And the Lord of hosts that planted thee, spake evil on thee, for the evils of the house of Israel, and of the house of Judah, which they did to themselves, and offered to Baalim, to stir me to wrath.
JER 11:18 Forsooth, Lord, thou showedest to me, and I knew; thou showedest to me the studies of them.
JER 11:19 And I am as a mild lamb, which is borne to slain sacrifice; and I knew not, that they thought counsels on me, and said, Send we a tree into the bread of him, and raze we him away from the land of livers, and his name be no more had in mind.
JER 11:20 But thou, Lord of hosts, that deemest justly [[or rightwisely]], and provest reins and hearts, see I thy vengeance of them; for to thee I showed my cause.
JER 11:21 Therefore the Lord saith these things to the men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, and say, Thou shalt not prophesy in the name of the Lord, and thou shalt not die in our hands.
JER 11:22 Therefore the Lord of hosts saith these things, Lo! I shall visit on them; the young men of them shall die by sword, the sons of them, and the daughters of them, shall die for hunger;
JER 11:23 and no remnants, either children left, shall be of them; for I shall bring in evil on the men of Anathoth, the year of the visitation of them.
JER 12:1 Forsooth, Lord, thou art just [[or rightwise]]; if I dispute with thee, nevertheless I shall speak just [[or right]] things to thee. Why hath the way of wicked men prosperity? It is well to all men that break the law, and do wickedly?
JER 12:2 Thou hast planted them, and they sent root; they increase, and make fruit; thou art nigh to the mouth of them, and far from the reins of them.
JER 12:3 And thou, Lord, hast known me, thou hast seen me, and hast proved mine heart with thee. Gather thou them together as a flock to slain sacrifice, and hallow thou them in the day of slaying.
JER 12:4 How long shall the earth mourn, and each herb of the field shall be dried, for the malice of them that dwell therein? A beast is wasted, and a bird, for they said, The Lord shall not see our last things.
JER 12:5 If thou travailest running with footmen, how shalt thou be able to strive with horses? but when thou art secure in the land of peace, what shalt thou do in the pride of Jordan?
JER 12:6 For why both thy brethren and the house of thy father, yea, they fought against thee, and cried with full voice after thee; believe thou not to them, when they speak goods to thee.
JER 12:7 I have left mine house, I have forsaken mine heritage; I gave my beloved soul into the hands of enemies thereof.
JER 12:8 Mine heritage is made as a lion in the wood to me; it gave voice against me, therefore I hated it.
JER 12:9 Whether mine heritage is a bird of diverse colours to me? whether it is a bird dyed throughout? All beasts of the field, come ye, be ye gathered together; haste ye for to devour.
JER 12:10 Many shepherds destroyed my vinery [[or vineyard]], defouled my part, gave my desirable portion into desert of wilderness;
JER 12:11 they setted it into scattering, and it mourned on me; all the land is desolate by desolation, for none is that again-thinketh in heart.
JER 12:12 All destroyers of the land came on all the ways of desert, for the sword of the Lord shall devour from the last part of the land unto the last part thereof; no peace is to all flesh.
JER 12:13 They sowed wheat, and reaped thorns; they took heritage, and it shall not profit to them. Ye shall be shamed of your fruits, for the wrath of the strong vengeance of the Lord.
JER 12:14 The Lord saith these things against all my worst neighbours, that touch the heritage which I parted to my people Israel, Lo! I shall draw them out of their land, and I shall draw the house of Judah out of the midst of them.
JER 12:15 And when I shall draw out those Jews, I shall turn again, and have mercy on them; and I shall lead them again, a man to his heritage, and a man into his land.
JER 12:16 And it shall be, if they that be taught learn the ways of my people, that they swear in my name, The Lord liveth, as they taught my people to swear in Baal, they shall be builded in the midst of my people.
JER 12:17 That if they hear not, I shall draw out that folk by drawing out and perdition, saith the Lord.
JER 13:1 The Lord saith these things to me, Go, and take in possession to thee a linen breech-girdle; and thou shalt put it on thy loins, and thou shalt not bear it into water.
JER 13:2 And I took in possession a breech-girdle, by the word of the Lord; and I putted about my loins.
JER 13:3 And the word of the Lord was made to me in the second time, and said,
JER 13:4 Take the breech-girdle, which thou haddest in possession, which is about thy loins; and rise thou, and go to Euphrates, and hide thou it there, in the hole of a stone.
JER 13:5 And I went, and hid it in Euphrates, as the Lord commanded to me.
JER 13:6 And it was done after full many days, the Lord said to me, Rise thou, and go to Euphrates, and take from thence the breech-girdle, which I commanded to thee, that thou shouldest hide it there.
JER 13:7 And I went to Euphrates, and digged out, and I took the breech-girdle from the place, where I had hid it; and lo! the breech-girdle was rotten, so that it was not able to any use.
JER 13:8 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and said,
JER 13:9 The Lord saith these things, So I shall make rotten the pride of Judah, and the much pride of Jerusalem,
JER 13:10 and this worst people, that will not hear my words, and go in the shrewdness of their heart; and they went after alien gods, to serve them, and to worship them; and they shall be as this breech-girdle, which is not able to any use.
JER 13:11 For as a breech-girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so I joined fast to me all the house of Israel, and all the house of Judah, saith the Lord, that they should be to me into a people, and into name, and into praising, and into glory; and they heard not.
JER 13:12 Therefore thou shalt say to them this word, The Lord God of Israel saith these things, Each pottle shall be filled of wine. And they shall say to thee, Whether we know not, that each pottle shall be filled of wine?
JER 13:13 And thou shalt say to them, The Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall fill with drunkenness all the dwellers of this land, and the kings of the generation of David, that sit on his throne, and the priests, and prophets, and all the dwellers of Jerusalem.
JER 13:14 And I shall scatter them, a man from his brother, and the fathers and sons together, saith the Lord; I shall not spare, and I shall not grant, neither I shall do mercy, that I lose not them.
JER 13:15 Hear ye, and perceive with ears; do not ye be raised [[up]], for the Lord spake.
JER 13:16 Give ye glory to your Lord God, before that it wax dark, and before that your feet hurt at [[the]] dark hills; ye shall abide light, and he shall set [[or put]] it into the shadow of death, and into darkness.
JER 13:17 That if ye hear not this, my soul shall weep in hid place for the face of pride; it weeping shall weep, and mine eye shall cast out a tear, for the flock of the Lord is taken.
JER 13:18 Say thou to the king, and to the lady, Be ye meeked, sit ye, for the crown of your glory shall go down from your head.
JER 13:19 The cities of the south be closed, and none is that openeth; all Judah is translated by perfect passing over, either going out of their land.
JER 13:20 Raise ye your eyes, and see ye, what men come from the north; where is the flock which is given to thee, thy noble sheep?
JER 13:21 What shalt thou say, when he shall visit thee? for thou hast taught them against thee, and thou hast taught against thine head. Whether sorrows have not taken thee, as a woman travailing of child?
JER 13:22 That if thou sayest in thine heart, Why came these things to me? for the multitude of thy wickedness thy shamefuller things be showed, thy feet be defouled.
JER 13:23 If a man of Ethiopia may change his skin, either a leopard may change his diversities, and ye may do well, when ye have learned evil.
JER 13:24 And I shall sow them abroad, as stubble which is ravished, or taken away, of the wind in desert.
JER 13:25 This is thy lot, and the part of thy measure of me, saith the Lord; for thou forgettedest me, and trustedest in a leasing.
JER 13:26 Wherefore and I made naked thine hips against thy face, and thy shame appeared,
JER 13:27 thine adulteries, and thine neighing, and the felony of thy fornication on little hills in the field; I saw thine abominations. Jerusalem, woe to thee, thou shalt not be cleansed after me till yet.
JER 14:1 The word of the Lord, that was made to Jeremy, of the words of dryness.
JER 14:2 Judah wailed, and the gates thereof fell down, and be made dark in [[the]] earth, and the cry of Jerusalem went up.
JER 14:3 Greater men sent their lesser men to water; they came to draw water, and they found no water, they brought again their vessels void; they were shamed and tormented, and they covered their heads,
JER 14:4 for [[the]] destroying of the land, for rain came not in the land. Earth-tillers were shamed, they covered their heads.
JER 14:5 For why and an hind calved in the field, and left her calves, for none herb was;
JER 14:6 and wild asses stood in rocks, and drew wind as dragons; their eyes failed, for none herb was.
JER 14:7 If our wickednesses answer to us, Lord, do thou for thy name, for our turnings away be many; we have sinned against thee.
JER 14:8 Thou abiding of Israel, the saviour thereof in the time of tribulation, why shalt thou be as a comeling in the land, and as a way-goer bowing [[down]] to dwell?
JER 14:9 why shalt thou be as a man of unstable dwelling, as a strong man that may not save? Forsooth, Lord, thou art in us, and thine holy name is called to help on us; forsake thou not us.
JER 14:10 The Lord saith these things to this people, that loved to stir his feet, and rested not, and pleased not the Lord; now he shall have mind on the wickednesses of them, and he shall visit the sins of them.
JER 14:11 And the Lord said to me, Do not thou pray for this people into good.
JER 14:12 When they shall fast, I shall not hear the prayers of them; and if they offer burnt sacrifices and slain sacrifices, I shall not receive them, for I shall waste them by sword and hunger and pestilence.
JER 14:13 And I said, A! A! A! Lord God, [[the]] prophets say to them, Ye shall not see sword, and hunger shall not be in you, but he shall give to you very peace in this place.
JER 14:14 And the Lord said to me, The prophets prophesy falsely in my name; I sent not them, and I commanded not to them, neither I spake to them; they prophesy to you a false revelation, and a guileful divining, and the deceiving of their heart.
JER 14:15 Therefore the Lord saith these things of the prophets that prophesy in my name, which I sent not, and say, Sword and hunger shall not be in this land; Those prophets shall be wasted by sword and hunger.
JER 14:16 And the peoples, to which they prophesied, shall be cast forth in the ways of Jerusalem, for hunger and sword, and none there shall be, that shall bury them; they and the wives of them, the sons and the daughters of them; and I shall shed [[or pour]] out on them their evil.
JER 14:17 And thou shalt say to them this word, Mine eyes lead down a tear by night and day, and be it not still; for the virgin, the daughter of my people, is defouled by great defouling, with the worst wound greatly.
JER 14:18 If I go out to [[the]] fields, lo! men be slain with sword; and if I enter into the city, lo! men be made lean for hunger; also a prophet and a priest went into the land which they knew not.
JER 14:19 Whether thou casting away hast cast away Judah, either thy soul hath loathed Zion? why therefore hast thou smitten us, so that no health there is? We abided peace, and no good is; and we abided time of healing, and lo! troubling is.
JER 14:20 Lord, we have known our unfaith-fulness, and the wickednesses of our fathers, for we have sinned to thee.
JER 14:21 Give thou not us into shame, for thy name, neither do thou despite to us; have thou mind on the seat of thy glory, make thou not void thy bond of peace with us.
JER 14:22 Whether in graven images of heathen men be they that rain, either heavens may give rains? whether thou art not our Lord God, whom we abided? For thou madest all these things.
JER 15:1 And the Lord said to me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, my soul is not to this people; cast thou them out from my face, and go they out.
JER 15:2 That if they say to thee, Whither shall we go out? thou shalt say to them, The Lord saith these things, They that to death, to death, and they that to sword, to sword, and they that to hunger, to hunger, and they that to captivity, to captivity.
JER 15:3 I shall visit on them four species, saith the Lord; a sword to slaying, and dogs for to rend, and volatiles [[or fowls]] of the air, and beasts of the earth, to devour and to destroy.
JER 15:4 And I shall give them into fervor to all realms of earth, for Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah, on all things which he did in Jerusalem.
JER 15:5 For why who shall have mercy on thee, Jerusalem, either who shall be sorry for thee, either who shall go to pray for thy peace?
JER 15:6 Thou hast forsaken me, saith the Lord, thou hast gone aback; and I shall stretch forth mine hand on thee, and I shall slay thee; I travailed praying.
JER 15:7 And I shall scatter them with a winnowing instrument in the gates of [[the]] earth; I killed, and lost my people, and nevertheless they turned not again from their ways.
JER 15:8 The widows thereof be multiplied to me above the gravel of the sea; and I brought into them a destroyer in midday on the mother of a young man, I sent dread suddenly on [[the]] cities.
JER 15:9 She was sick that childed seven, her soul failed; the sun went down to her, when day was yet. She was shamed, and was ashamed; and I shall give the residue thereof into sword in the sight of their enemies, saith the Lord.
JER 15:10 My mother, woe to me; why engenderedest thou me a man of chiding, a man of discord in all the land? I lent not, neither any man lent to me; all men curse me,
JER 15:11 the Lord saith. No man believe to me, if thy remnants be not into good, if I run not to thee in the time of torment, and in the time of tribulation and of anguish, against the enemy.
JER 15:12 Whether iron and metal shall be joined by peace to iron from the north?
JER 15:13 And I shall give freely thy riches and thy treasures into ravishing, for all thy sins, and in all thine ends.
JER 15:14 And I shall bring thine enemies from the land which thou knowest not; for fire is kindled in my strong vengeance, and it shall burn on you.
JER 15:15 Lord, thou knowest, have thou mind on me, and visit me, and deliver me from them that pursue me; do not thou take me in thy patience, know thou, that I suffered shame for thee.
JER 15:16 Thy words be found, and I ate those [[or them]]; and thy word was made to me into joy, and into gladness of mine heart; for thy name, Lord God of hosts, is called to help on me.
JER 15:17 I sat not in the council of players, and I had glory for the face of thine hand; I sat alone, for thou filledest me with bitterness.
JER 15:18 Why is my sorrow made ever-lasting, and my wound despaired, forsook to be cured? it is made to me, as a leasing of unfaithful waters.
JER 15:19 For this thing the Lord saith these things, If thou turnest, I shall turn thee, and thou shalt stand before my face; and if thou partest precious thing from vile thing, thou shalt be as my mouth; and they shall be turned to thee, and thou shalt not be turned to them.
JER 15:20 And I shall give thee into a brazen wall and strong to this people, and they shall fight against thee, and they shall not have the victory; for I am with thee, to save thee, and to deliver thee, saith the Lord.
JER 15:21 And I shall deliver thee from the hand of the worst men, and I shall again-buy thee from the hand of strong men.
JER 16:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and said,
JER 16:2 Thou shalt not take a wife, and sons and daughters shall not be to thee in this place.
JER 16:3 For the Lord saith these things on sons and daughters, that be engendered in this place, and on the mothers of them, that engendered them, and on the fathers of them, of whose generation they be born in this land.
JER 16:4 They shall die by deaths of sicknesses, they shall not be bewailed, and they shall not be buried; they shall be into a dunghill on the face of [[the]] earth, and they shall be wasted by sword and hunger; and the carrion of them shall be into meat to the volatiles [[or fowls]] of heaven, and to [[the]] beasts of the earth.
JER 16:5 For the Lord saith these things, Enter thou not into an house of feast, neither go thou to bewail, neither comfort thou them; for I have taken away my peace from this people, saith the Lord, and mercy and merciful doings.
JER 16:6 And great and small shall die in this land; they shall not be buried, neither shall be bewailed; and they shall not cut themselves, neither bald-ness shall be made for them.
JER 16:7 And they shall not break bread among them to him that mourneth, to comfort on a dead man, and they shall not give to them drink of a cup, to comfort on their father and mother.
JER 16:8 And thou shalt not enter into the house of feast, that thou sit with them, and eat, and drink.
JER 16:9 For why the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Lo! I shall take away from this place, before your eyes, and in your days, the voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the spouse, and the voice of spousess.
JER 16:10 And when thou shalt tell all these words to this people, and they shall say to thee, Why spake the Lord all this great evil on us? what is our wickedness, either what is our sin which we sinned to our Lord God?
JER 16:11 thou shalt say to them, For your fathers forsook me, saith the Lord, and went after alien gods, and served them, and worshipped them, and they forsook me, and kept not my law.
JER 16:12 But also ye wrought worse than your fathers; for lo! each man goeth after the shrewdness of his evil heart, that he hear not me.
JER 16:13 And I shall cast you out of this land, into the land which ye and your fathers know not; and ye shall serve there to alien gods day and night, which shall not give rest to you.
JER 16:14 Therefore lo! days come, saith the Lord, and it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, that led the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt;
JER 16:15 but, The Lord liveth, that led [[out]] the sons of Israel from the land of the north, and from all lands to which I casted them out; and I shall lead them again into their land which I gave to the fathers of them.
JER 16:16 Lo! I shall send many fishers to them, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and after these things I shall send many hunters to them, and they shall hunt them from each mountain, and from each little hill, and from the caves of stones.
JER 16:17 For mine eyes be on all the ways of them; those ways be not hid from my face, and the wickedness of them was not privy from mine eyes.
JER 16:18 And I shall yield first the double wickednesses and [[the]] sins of them, for they defouled my land in the slain beasts of their idols, and filled mine heritage with their abominations.
JER 16:19 Lord, my strength, and my stal-worth[[y]] ness, and my refuge in the day of tribulation, heathen men shall come to thee from the farthest places of earth, and shall say, Verily our fathers held a leasing in possession, vanity that profited not to them.
JER 16:20 Whether a man shall make gods to himself? and those [[or they]] be no gods.
JER 16:21 Therefore lo! I shall show to them by this while, I shall show to them mine hand, and my strength; and they shall know, that the name to me is [[the]] Lord.
JER 17:1 The sin of Judah is written with an iron pointel, in a nail of adamant; it is written on the breadth of the heart of them, and in the horns of the altars of them.
JER 17:2 When the sons of them bethink on their altars, and [[maumet]] woods, and on the trees full of boughs,
JER 17:3 making sacrifice in the field in high mountains, I shall give thy strength and all thy treasures into ravishing, thine high things for sins in all thine ends.
JER 17:4 And thou shalt be left alone from thine heritage which I gave to thee; and I shall make thee to serve thine enemies, in the land which thou knowest not; for thou hast kindled fire in my strong vengeance, it shall burn till into without end.
JER 17:5 The Lord saith these things, Cursed is the man that trusteth in man, and setteth [[or putteth]] flesh his arm, and his heart goeth away from the Lord.
JER 17:6 For he shall be as brooms in desert, and he shall not see, when good shall come; but he shall dwell in dryness in desert, in the land of saltness, and unhabitable.
JER 17:7 Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and the Lord shall be his trust.
JER 17:8 And he shall be as a tree, which is planted over waters, which sendeth his roots to moisture; and it shall not dread, when heat shall come; and the leaf thereof shall be green, and it shall not be moved in the time of dryness, neither any time it shall fail to make fruit.
JER 17:9 The heart of man is shrewd, and unsearchable; who shall know it?
JER 17:10 I am the Lord seeking the heart, and proving the reins, either kidneys, and I give to each man after his way, and after the fruit of his findings.
JER 17:11 A partridge nourished those things which she breeded not; he made riches, and not in doom; in the midst of his days he shall forsake them, and in his last time he shall be unwise.
JER 17:12 The seat of glory of highness was at the beginning the place of our hallowing, the abiding of Israel.
JER 17:13 Lord, all they that forsake thee, shall be shamed; they that go away from thee, shall be written in [[the]] earth, for they have forsaken the Lord, a vein of quick waters.
JER 17:14 Lord, heal me, and I shall be healed; make thou me safe, and I shall be safe; for thou art my praising.
JER 17:15 Lo! they say to me, Where is the word of the Lord? come it.
JER 17:16 And I am not troubled, pursuing [[or following]] thee shepherd, and I desired not the day of man, thou knowest. That that went out of my lips was rightful [[or right]] in thy sight.
JER 17:17 Be thou not to dread to me; thou art mine hope in the day of torment.
JER 17:18 Be they shamed, that pursue me, and be I not shamed; dread they, and dread not I; bring in on them a day of torment, and defoul thou them by double defouling.
JER 17:19 The Lord saith these things to me, Go thou, and stand in the gate of the sons of the people, by which the kings of Judah enter [[in]], and go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem.
JER 17:20 And thou shall say to them, Hear the word of the Lord, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the dwellers of Jerusalem, that enter [[in]] by these gates.
JER 17:21 The Lord God saith these things, Keep ye your souls, and do not ye bear burdens in the day of sabbath, neither bring in by the gates of Jerusalem.
JER 17:22 And do not ye cast burdens out of your houses in the day of sabbath, and ye shall not do any work; hallow ye the day of sabbath, as I commanded to your fathers.
JER 17:23 And they heard not, neither bowed down their ear, but they made hard their noll, that they should not hear me, and that they should not take chastising.
JER 17:24 And it shall be, if ye hear me, saith the Lord, that ye bear not in burdens by the gates of this city in the day of sabbath, and if ye hallow the day of sabbath, that ye do not work therein,
JER 17:25 kings and princes sitting on the seat of David shall enter [[in]] by the gates of this city, and ascending [[or going]] in chariots and horses; they, and the princes of them, the men of Judah, and the dwellers of Jerusalem; and this city shall be inhabited without end.
JER 17:26 And they shall come from the cities of Judah, and from the compass of Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from [[the]] field places, and from [[the]] hilly [[or mountainous]] places, and from the south, bearing burnt sacrifice, and slain sacrifice, and incense; and they shall bring offering into the house of the Lord.
JER 17:27 Forsooth if ye hear not me, that ye hallow the day of sabbath, and that ye bear not a burden, and that ye bring not in by the gates of Jerusalem in the day of sabbath, I shall kindle fire in the gates thereof; and it shall devour the houses of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched.
JER 18:1 The word that was made of the Lord to Jeremy, and said,
JER 18:2 Rise thou, and go down into the house of a potter, and there thou shalt hear my words.
JER 18:3 And I went down into the house of a potter, and lo! he made a work on a wheel.
JER 18:4 And the vessel was destroyed, which he made of clay with his hands; and he turned it, and made it another vessel, as it pleased in his eyes to make.
JER 18:5 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
JER 18:6 Whether as this potter doeth, I may not do to you, the house of Israel? saith the Lord. Lo! as clay is in the hand of a potter, so ye, the house of Israel, be in mine hand.
JER 18:7 Suddenly I shall speak against a folk, and against a realm, that I draw out, and destroy, and lose [[or scatter]] it.
JER 18:8 If that folk doeth penance of his evil, which I spake against it, also I shall do penance on the evil, which I thought to do to it.
JER 18:9 And I shall speak suddenly of a folk, and of a realm, that I build, and plant it.
JER 18:10 If it doeth evil before mine eyes, that it hear not my voice, I shall do penance on the good which I spake, that I should do to it.
JER 18:11 Now therefore say thou to a man of Judah, and to the dweller of Jerusalem, and say, The Lord saith these things, Lo! I make evil against you, and I think a thought against you; each man turn again from his evil way, and dress ye your ways and your studies.
JER 18:12 Which said, We have despaired, for we shall go after our thoughts, and we shall do each man the shrewdness of his evil heart.
JER 18:13 Therefore the Lord saith these things, Ask ye heathen men, who heard such horrible things, which the virgin of Israel hath done greatly?
JER 18:14 Whether [[the]] snow of the Lebanon shall fail from the stone of the field? either cold waters breaking out, and floating down, may be taken away?
JER 18:15 For my people hath forgotten me, and they offered sacrifices in vain, and stumbled in their ways, and in the paths of the world, that they went by those [[or them]] in a way not trodden;
JER 18:16 that the land of them should be into desolation, and into an hissing everlasting; for why each that passeth by it, shall be astonied, and shall move his head.
JER 18:17 As a burning wind I shall scatter them before the enemy; I shall show to them the back and not the face, in the day of the perdition of them.
JER 18:18 And they said, Come ye, and think we thoughts against Jeremy; for why the law shall not perish from a priest, neither counsel shall perish from a wise man, neither word shall perish from a prophet; come ye, and smite we him with tongue, and take we none heed to all the words of him.
JER 18:19 Lord, give thou attention to me, and hear thou the voice of mine adversaries.
JER 18:20 Whether evil is yielded for good, for they have digged a pit to my soul; have thou mind, that I stood in thy sight, to speak good for them, and to turn away thine indignation from them.
JER 18:21 Therefore give thou the sons of them into hunger, and lead forth them into the hands of [[the]] sword; the wives of them be made without children, and be made widows, and the husbands of them be slain by death; the young men of them be pierced together by sword in battle.
JER 18:22 Cry be heard of the houses of them, for thou shalt bring suddenly a thief on them; for they digged a pit to take me, and hid snares to my feet.
JER 18:23 But thou, Lord, knowest all the counsel of them against me into death; do thou not mercy to the wickedness of them, and the sin of them be not done away from thy face; be they made falling down in thy sight, in the time of thy strong vengeance; use thou them to other thing than they were ordained.
JER 19:1 The Lord saith these things, Go thou, and take an earthen pottle of a potter, [[and]] of the elder men of the people, and of the elder men of the priests.
JER 19:2 And go thou out to the valley of the sons of Hinnom, which is beside the entering of the earthen gate; and there thou shalt preach the words which I shall speak to thee;
JER 19:3 and thou shalt say, Kings of Judah, and the dwellers of Jerusalem, hear ye the word of the Lord. The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Lo! I shall bring in torment on this place, so that each man that heareth it, his ears tingle.
JER 19:4 For they have forsaken me, and made alien this place, and offered sacrifices to alien gods therein, which they, and the fathers of them, and the kings of Judah, knew not; and they filled this place with the blood of innocents,
JER 19:5 and builded high things to Baalim, to burn their sons in fire, into burnt sacrifice to Baalim; which things I commanded not, neither spake, neither those ascended [[or went up]] into mine heart.
JER 19:6 Therefore the Lord saith, Lo! days shall come, and this place shall no more be called Tophet, and the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaying.
JER 19:7 And I shall destroy the counsel of Judah and of Jerusalem in this place, and I shall destroy them by sword, in the sight of their enemies, and in the hand of men seeking the lives of them; and I shall give their dead bodies to be meat to the birds of the air, and to [[the]] beasts of earth.
JER 19:8 And I shall set this city into wondering, and into hissing; each that passeth by it, shall wonder, and hiss on all the vengeance thereof.
JER 19:9 And I shall feed them with the fleshes of their sons, and with the fleshes of their daughters; and each man shall eat the fleshes of his friend in the besieging and anguish, in which the enemies of them, and they that seek the lives of them, shall enclose them altogether.
JER 19:10 And thou shalt all-break the pottle before the eyes of the men, that shall go with thee.
JER 19:11 And thou shalt say to them, The Lord of hosts saith these things, So I shall all-break this people, and this city, as the vessel of a potter is all-broken, which may no more be restored; and they shall be buried in Tophet, for none other place is to bury.
JER 19:12 So I shall do to this place, saith the Lord, and to dwellers thereof, that I set this city as Tophet.
JER 19:13 And the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah, shall be as the place of Tophet; all the unclean houses, in whose roofs they sacrificed to all the chivalry of heaven, and offered moist sacrifices to alien gods.
JER 19:14 Forsooth Jeremy came from Tophet, whither the Lord had sent him for to prophesy; and he stood in the porch of the house of the Lord, and said to all the people,
JER 19:15 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Lo! I shall bring in on this city, and on all the cities thereof, all the evils which I spake against it; for they made hard their noll, that they heard not my words.
JER 20:1 And Pashur, the son of Immer, the priest, that was ordained prince in the house of the Lord, heard Jeremy prophesying these words.
JER 20:2 And Pashur smote Jeremy, the prophet, and sent him into the stocks, that were in the higher gate of Benjamin, in the house of the Lord.
JER 20:3 And when it was clear in the morrow, Pashur led Jeremy out of the stocks. And Jeremy said to him, The Lord called not Pashur thy name, but Dread on each side.
JER 20:4 For the Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall give thee and all thy friends into dread, and they shall fall down by the sword of their enemies; and thine eyes shall see; and I shall give all Judah in the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall lead them over into Babylon, and he shall smite them with sword.
JER 20:5 And I shall give all the chattel [[or substance]] of this city, and all the travail thereof, and all the price; and I shall give all the treasures of the kings of Judah in the hand of their enemies; and they shall ravish them, and shall take, and lead [[them]] forth into Babylon.
JER 20:6 Forsooth thou, Pashur, and all the dwellers of thine house, shall go into captivity; and thou shalt come into Babylon, and thou shalt die there; and thou shalt be buried there, thou and all thy friends, to which thou prophesiedest leasing.
JER 20:7 Lord, thou deceivedest me, and I am deceived; thou were stronger than I, and thou haddest the mastery; I am made into scorn all day. All men bemock me,
JER 20:8 for now a while ago I spake, crying [[out]] wickedness, and I cried destroying. And the word of the Lord is made to me into shame, and into scorn all day.
JER 20:9 And I said, I shall not have mind on him, and I shall no more speak in his name. And the word of the Lord was made, as fire swelling in mine heart, and enclosed in my bones; and I failed, not suffering to bear.
JER 20:10 For I heard despisings of many men, and dread in compass, Pursue ye, and pursue we him, of all men that were peaceable to me, and keeping my side; if in any manner he be deceived, and we have the mastery against him, and get vengeance of him.
JER 20:11 Forsooth the Lord as a strong warrior is with me, therefore they that pursue me shall fall, and they shall be feeble; and they shall be shamed greatly, for they understood not everlasting shame, that shall never be done away.
JER 20:12 And thou, Lord of hosts, the prover of a just [[or rightwise]] man, which seest the reins and [[the]] heart, I beseech, see I thy vengeance of them; for I have showed my cause to thee.
JER 20:13 Sing ye to the Lord, praise ye the Lord, for he delivered the soul of a poor man from the hand of evil men.
JER 20:14 Cursed be the day wherein I was born, the day wherein my mother childed me be not blessed.
JER 20:15 Cursed be the man, that told to my father, and said, A knave child is born to thee, and made him glad as with joy.
JER 20:16 That man be as the cities be, which the Lord destroyed, and it repented not him; [[Be that man as be the cities, that the Lord turned upside-down, and it repented him not; hear he cry early, and yelling in midday time,]]
JER 20:17 he that killed not me from the womb, hear cry early, and yelling in the time of midday; that my mother were [[made]] a sepulchre to me, and her womb were an everlasting conceiving. [[that me he slew not from the privy womb; that made were to me my mother a sepulchre, and her privy womb conceiving everlasting.]]
JER 20:18 Why went I out of the womb, that I should see travail and sorrow, and that my days shall be wasted in shame?
JER 21:1 The word which was made of the Lord to Jeremy, when king Zedekiah sent to him Pashur, the son of Melchiah, and Zephaniah, the priest, the son of Maaseiah, and said,
JER 21:2 Ask thou the Lord for us, for Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, fighteth against us; if in hap the Lord do with us by all his marvels, and he go away from us.
JER 21:3 And Jeremy said to them, Thus ye shall say to Zedekiah,
JER 21:4 The Lord God of Israel saith these things, Lo! I shall turn the instruments of battle that be in your hands, and with which ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against Chaldees, that besiege you in the compass of [[the]] walls; and I shall gather those [[or them]] together in the midst of this city.
JER 21:5 And I shall overcome you in [[a]] hand stretched forth, and in [[a]] strong arm, and in strong vengeance, and in indignation, and in great wrath;
JER 21:6 and I shall smite the dwellers of this city, men and beasts shall die by great pestilence.
JER 21:7 And after these things, saith the Lord, I shall give Zedekiah, king of Judah, and his servants, and his people, and that be left in this city from pestilence, and sword, and hunger, in the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and in the hand of their enemies, and in the hand of men seeking the life of them; and he shall smite them by the sharpness of sword; and he shall not be bowed, neither shall spare, neither shall have mercy.
JER 21:8 And thou shalt say to this people, The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I give before you the way of life, and the way of death.
JER 21:9 He that dwelleth in this city, shall die by sword, and hunger, and pestilence; but he that goeth out, and fleeth over to [[the]] Chaldees that besiege you, shall live, and his life shall be as a prey to him.
JER 21:10 For I have set my face on this city into evil, and not into good, saith the Lord; it shall be given in the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.
JER 21:11 And thou shall say to the house of the king of Judah, the house of David, Hear ye the word of the Lord.
JER 21:12 The Lord saith these things, Deem ye early doom, and deliver ye him that is oppressed by violence from the hand of the false challenger; lest peradventure mine indignation go out as fire, and be kindled, and none be that quench, for the malice of your studies.
JER 21:13 Lo! I do to thee, dwelleress of the firm valley, and plain, saith the Lord, [[ye]] which say, Who shall smite us, and who shall enter into our houses?
JER 21:14 And I shall visit on you by the fruit of your studies, saith the Lord; and I shall kindle fire in the forest thereof, and it shall devour all things in the compass thereof.
JER 22:1 The Lord saith these things, Go thou down into the house of the king of Judah, and thou shalt speak there this word,
JER 22:2 and shalt say, Hear thou the word of the Lord, thou king of Judah, that sittest on the seat of David, thou, and thy servants, and thy people, that enter [[in]] by these gates.
JER 22:3 The Lord saith these things, Do ye doom, and rightfulness [[or right-wiseness]], and deliver ye him that is oppressed by violence from the hand of the false challenger; and do not ye make sorry, neither oppress ye wickedly a comeling, and a fatherless child, and a widow, and shed ye not out innocent blood in this place.
JER 22:4 For if ye doing do this word, kings of the kin of David sitting on his throne shall enter [[in]] by the gates of this house, and shall ascend or go upon chariots and horses, they, and the servants, and the people of them.
JER 22:5 That if ye hear not these words, I swore in myself, saith the Lord, that this house shall be into wilderness.
JER 22:6 For the Lord saith these things on the house of the king of Judah; Gilead, thou art to me the head of the Lebanon; credence be not given to me, if I set not thee a wilderness, cities unhabitable.
JER 22:7 And I shall hallow on thee a man slaying, and his arms; and they shall cut down thy chosen cedars, and shall cast down into fire.
JER 22:8 And many folks shall pass by this city, and each man shall say to his neighbour, Why did the Lord thus to this great city?
JER 22:9 And they shall answer, For they forsook the covenant of their Lord God, and worshipped alien gods, and served them.
JER 22:10 Do not ye beweep him that is dead, neither wail ye on him by weeping; bewail ye him that goeth out, for he shall no more turn again, neither he shall see the land of his birth.
JER 22:11 For the Lord saith these things to Shallum, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, that reigned for Josiah, his father, He that went out of this place, shall no more turn again hither;
JER 22:12 but in the place to which I have translated him, there he shall die, and he shall no more see this land.
JER 22:13 Woe to him that buildeth his house in unrightfulness [[or unrightwise-ness]], and his solars not in doom; he shall oppress his friend in vain, and he shall not yield his hire to him.
JER 22:14 Which saith, I shall build to me a large house, and wide solars; which openeth windows to himself, and maketh couples of cedar, and painteth with red colour.
JER 22:15 Whether thou shalt reign, for thou comparisonest thee to a cedar? whether thy father ate not, and drank, and did doom and rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] then, when it was well to him?
JER 22:16 He deemed the cause of a poor man, and needy, into his good; whether not therefore for he knew me? saith the Lord.
JER 22:17 Forsooth thine eyes and heart be to avarice, and to shed innocent blood, and to false challenge, and to the performing of evil work.
JER 22:18 Therefore the Lord saith these things to Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, They shall not bewail him, Woe brother! and woe sister! they shall not sound together to him, Woe lord! and woe noble man!
JER 22:19 He shall be buried with the burying of an ass, he shall be rotten, and cast forth without the gates of Jerusalem.
JER 22:20 Ascend [[or Go]] thou [[up]] on the Lebanon, and cry thou, and give thy voice in Bashan, and cry to them that pass forth, for all thy lovers be all-broken.
JER 22:21 I spake to thee in thy plenty, and thou saidest, I shall not hear; this is thy way from thy youth, for thou heardest not my voice.
JER 22:22 Wind shall feed all thy shepherds, and thy lovers shall go into captivity;
JER 22:23 and then thou that sittest in the Lebanon, and makest nest in cedars, shalt be shamed, and ashamed of all thy malice. How wailedest thou, when sorrows were come to thee, as the sorrow of a woman travailing of child?
JER 22:24 I live, saith the Lord, for thou Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, were a ring in my right hand, from thence I shall draw away him.
JER 22:25 And I shall give thee in the hand of them that seek thy life, and in the hand of them whose face thou dreadest, and in the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and in the hand of Chaldees.
JER 22:26 And I shall send thee, and thy mother that engendered thee, into an alien land, in which ye were not born, and there ye shall die;
JER 22:27 and they shall not turn again into the land, to which they raise their soul, that they turn again thither.
JER 22:28 Whether this man Jeconiah is an earthen vessel, and all-broken? whether a vessel without all-liking? Why be he and his seed cast away, and cast forth into a land which they knew not?
JER 22:29 Earth, earth, earth, hear thou the word of the Lord.
JER 22:30 The Lord saith these things, Write thou this man barren, a man that shall not have prosperity in his days; for of his seed shall be no man, that shall sit on the seat of David, and have power further in Judah.
JER 23:1 Woe to the shepherds, that scatter and draw the flock of my pasture, saith the Lord.
JER 23:2 Therefore the Lord God of Israel saith these things to the shepherds that feed my people, Ye have scattered my flock, and have cast them out, and have not visited them; lo! I shall visit on you the malice of your studies, saith the Lord.
JER 23:3 And I shall gather together the remnants of my flock from all lands, to which I shall cast them out thither; and I shall turn them to their fields, and they shall increase, and shall be multiplied.
JER 23:4 And I shall raise up shepherds on them, and they shall feed them; they shall no more dread, and shall not be afeared; and none shall be sought of the number, saith the Lord.
JER 23:5 Lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall raise a just [[or rightwise]] burgeoning, either seed, to David; and he shall reign a king, and he shall be wise, and he shall make doom and rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] in earth.
JER 23:6 In those days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell trustily; and this is the name which they shall call him, The Lord our rightful [[or Our rightwise Lord]].
JER 23:7 For this thing lo! days come, saith the Lord, and they shall no more say, The Lord liveth, that led the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt;
JER 23:8 but, The Lord liveth, that led out, and brought the seed of the house of Israel from the land of the north, and from all lands to which I had cast them out thither; and they shall dwell in their [[own]] land.
JER 23:9 To the prophets; Mine heart is contrite, either all-broken for sorrow, in the midst of me, all my bones trembled together; I am made as a man drunken, and as a man wet of wine, of the face of the Lord, and of the face of the holy words of him;
JER 23:10 for the land is filled with adulterers. For the earth mourned of the face of cursing; the fields of desert be made dry, the course of them is made evil, and their strength is unlike.
JER 23:11 For why the prophet and the priest be defouled; and in mine house, saith the Lord, I found the evil of them.
JER 23:12 Therefore the way of them shall be as slidery thing in darknesses, for they shall be hurtled, either shoved, and shall fall down therein; for I shall bring on them evils, the year of [[the]] visitation of them, saith the Lord.
JER 23:13 And in the prophets of Samaria I saw fondness [[or folly]], and they prophesied in Baal, and deceived my people Israel.
JER 23:14 And in the prophets of Jerusalem I saw, likeness, adultery, and the way of leasing; and they comforted the hands of the worst men, that each man should not convert from his malice; all they be made as Sodom to me, and all the dwellers thereof be made as Gomorrah.
JER 23:15 Therefore the Lord of hosts saith these things to the prophets, Lo! I shall feed them with wormwood, and I shall give drink to them with gall; for why defouling is gone out of the prophets of Jerusalem on all the land.
JER 23:16 The Lord of hosts saith these things, Do not ye hear the words of [[the]] prophets, that prophesy to you, and deceive you; they speak the vision of their heart, not of the mouth of the Lord.
JER 23:17 They say to them that blaspheme me, The Lord spake, Peace shall be to you; and they said to each man that goeth in the shrewdness of his heart, Evil shall not come [[up]] on you.
JER 23:18 For why who is present in the counsel of the Lord, and saw, and heard his word? who beheld, and heard the word of him?
JER 23:19 Lo! the whirlwind of the Lord’s indignation shall go out, and tempest breaking [[out]] shall come [[up]] on the head of wicked men.
JER 23:20 The strong vengeance of the Lord shall not turn again, till that he do, and till that he [[ful]] fill the thought of his heart. In the last days ye shall understand the counsel of him.
JER 23:21 I sent not the prophets, and they ran; I spake not to them, and they prophesied.
JER 23:22 If they had stood in my counsel, and had made known my words to my people, forsooth I had turned them away from their evil way, and from their worst thoughts.
JER 23:23 Guessest thou, whether I am God of nigh, saith the Lord, and not God afar?
JER 23:24 A man shall not be privy in hid places, and I shall not see him, saith the Lord. Whether I fill not heaven and earth? saith the Lord.
JER 23:25 I heard what things the prophets said, prophesying leasing in my name, and saying, I dreamed dreams.
JER 23:26 How long is this thing in the heart of prophets, prophesying leasing, and prophesying the deceit of their heart?
JER 23:27 Which will make, that my people forget my name for the dreams of them, which each man telleth to his neighbour, as the fathers of them forgat my name for Baal.
JER 23:28 A prophet that hath a dream, tell a dream; and he that hath my word, speak verily my word. What is with [[the]] chaffs to the wheat? saith the Lord.
JER 23:29 Whether my words be not as fire burning, saith the Lord, and as an hammer all-breaking a stone?
JER 23:30 Therefore lo! I am ready to the prophets, saith the Lord, that steal my words, each man from his neighbour.
JER 23:31 Lo! I to the prophets, saith the Lord, that take their tongues, and say, The Lord saith.
JER 23:32 Lo! I to the prophets, dreaming leasing, saith the Lord; which told them, and deceived my people in their leasing, and in their miracles, when I had not sent them, neither had commanded to them; which profited nothing to this people, saith the Lord.
JER 23:33 Therefore if this people, either prophet, either priest, asketh thee, and saith, What is the burden of the Lord? thou shalt say to them, Ye be the burden, for I shall cast you away, saith the Lord;
JER 23:34 and a prophet, and a priest, and the people, that saith, The burden of the Lord, I shall visit on that man, and on his house.
JER 23:35 Ye shall say these things, each man to his neighbour, and to his brother, What answered the Lord? and, What spake the Lord?
JER 23:36 For the burden of the Lord shall no more be remembered, and the word of each man shall be a burden to him; and ye have perverted the words of [[the]] living God, of the Lord of hosts, your God.
JER 23:37 Thou shalt say these things to the prophet, What answered the Lord to thee? and, What spake the Lord?
JER 23:38 Forsooth if ye say, The burden of the Lord, for this thing the Lord saith these things, For ye said this word, The burden of the Lord, and I sent to you, and I said, Do not ye say, The burden of the Lord;
JER 23:39 therefore lo! I shall take you away, and shall bear, and I shall forsake you, and the city which I gave to you, and to your fathers, from my face.
JER 23:40 And I shall give you into everlasting shame, and into everlasting scandal, that shall never be done away by forgetting.
JER 24:1 The Lord showed to me, and lo! two panniers full of figs were set before the temple of the Lord, after that Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, translated Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, and the princes of him, and a subtle craftsman, and a goldsmith, from Jerusalem, and brought them into Babylon.
JER 24:2 And one pannier had full good figs, as figs of the first time be wont to be; and one pannier had full evil figs, that might not be eaten, for those [[or they]] were evil figs.
JER 24:3 And the Lord said to me, Jeremy, what thing seest thou? And I said, Figs, good figs, full good; and evil figs, full evil, that may not be eaten, for those [[or they]] be evil figs.
JER 24:4 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and said,
JER 24:5 The Lord God of Israel saith these things, As these figs be good, so I shall know the transmigration of Judah, which I sent out from this place into the land of Chaldees, into good.
JER 24:6 And I shall set [[or put]] mine eyes on them to please, and I shall bring them again into this land; and I shall build them, and I shall not destroy them; and I shall plant them, and I shall not draw up by the root.
JER 24:7 And I shall give to them an heart, that they know me, for I am the Lord; and they shall be into a people to me, and I shall be into God to them, for they shall turn again to me in all their heart.
JER 24:8 And as the worst figs be, that may not be eaten, for those [[or they]] be evil figs, the Lord saith these things, So I shall give Zedekiah, the king of Judah, and the princes of him, and other men of Jerusalem, that dwell in this city, and that dwell in the land of Egypt.
JER 24:9 And I shall give them into travailing and torment in all realms of earth, into reproof, and into parable, and into a proverb, and into cursing, in all places to which I casted them out.
JER 24:10 And I shall send in them sword, and hunger, and pestilence, till they be wasted from the land which I gave to them, and to the fathers of them.
JER 25:1 The word of the Lord, that was made to Jeremy, of all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, after that Jeconiah was translated into Babylon; that is the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon;
JER 25:2 which word Jeremy, the prophet, spake to all the people of Judah, and to all the dwellers of Jerusalem, and said,
JER 25:3 From the thirteenth year of the realm of Josiah, the son of Amon, the king of Judah, unto this day, this is the three and twentieth year, the word of the Lord was made to me; and I spake to you, and I rose by night and spake, and ye heard not.
JER 25:4 And the Lord sent to you all his servants prophets, and rose full early, and sent, and ye heard not, neither ye bowed [[in]] your ears, for to hear;
JER 25:5 when he said, Turn ye again, each man from his evil way, and from your worst thoughts, and ye shall dwell in the land which the Lord gave to you, and to your fathers, from the world and till into the world.
JER 25:6 And do not ye go after alien gods, that ye serve them, and worship them, neither stir ye me to wrath-fulness [[or to wrath]], in the works of your hands, and I shall not torment you.
JER 25:7 And ye heard not me, saith the Lord, that ye stirred me to wrathful-ness [[or to wrath]] in the works of your hands, into your [[own]] evil.
JER 25:8 Therefore the Lord of hosts saith these things, For that that ye heard not my words,
JER 25:9 lo! I shall send, and take all the kindreds of the north, saith the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar, my servant, the king of Babylon; and I shall bring them on this land, and on the dwellers thereof, and on all nations, that be in the compass thereof; and I shall slay them, and I shall set them into wondering, and into hissing, and into everlasting wildernesses.
JER 25:10 And I shall lose of them the voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of spouse, and the voice of spousess, the voice of [[the]] quern, and the light of the lantern.
JER 25:11 And all the land thereof shall be into wilderness, and into wondering; and all these folks shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.
JER 25:12 And when seventy years be [[ful]] filled, I shall visit on the king of Babylon, and on that folk, the wicked-ness of them, saith the Lord, and on the land of Chaldees, and I shall set [[or put]] it into everlasting wildernesses.
JER 25:13 And I shall bring on that land all my words which I spake against it, all thing that is written in this book; whatever things Jeremy prophesied against all folks;
JER 25:14 for they served to them, when they were many folks, and great kings; and I shall yield to them after the works of them, and after the deeds of their hands.
JER 25:15 For the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith thus, Take thou the cup of wine of this strong vengeance from mine hand, and thou shall pour out drink thereof to all heathen men, to which I shall send thee.
JER 25:16 And they shall drink, and shall be troubled [[or disturbed]], and shall be mad, of the face of sword, which I shall send among them.
JER 25:17 And I took the cup from the hand of the Lord, and I poured out drink to all folks, to which the Lord sent me;
JER 25:18 to Jerusalem, and to all the cities of Judah, and to the kings thereof, and to the princes thereof; that I should give them into wilderness, and into wondering, and into hissing, and into cursing, as this day is;
JER 25:19 to Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, and to his servants, and to his princes, and to all his people;
JER 25:20 and to all men generally, to all the kings of the land Uz, and to all the kings of the land of Philistines, and to Ashkelon, and to Azzah, and to Ekron, and to the residues of Ashdod;
JER 25:21 to Idumea, and to Moab, and to the sons of Ammon;
JER 25:22 and to all the kings of Tyre, and to all the kings of Sidon, and to the kings of the land of isles that be beyond the sea;
JER 25:23 and to Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and to all men that be clipped on the long hair;
JER 25:24 and to all the kings of Arabia, and to all the kings of the west, that dwell in desert;
JER 25:25 and to all the kings of Zimri, and to all the kings of Elam, and to all the kings of Medes;
JER 25:26 and to all the kings of the north, of nigh and of far, to each man against his brother; and to all the realms of earth, that be on the face thereof; and the king of Sheshach shall drink after them.
JER 25:27 And thou shalt say to them, The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Drink ye, and be ye drunken, and spew ye, and fall ye down, and do not ye rise from the face of [[the]] sword which I shall send among you.
JER 25:28 And when they will not take the cup from thine hand, that they drink, thou shalt say to them, The Lord of hosts saith these things, Ye drinking shall drink;
JER 25:29 for lo! in the city in which my name is called to help, I begin to torment, and shall ye as innocents be without pain? ye shall not be without pain, for I call sword on all the dwellers of earth, saith the Lord of hosts.
JER 25:30 And thou shalt prophesy to them all these words, and thou shalt say to them, The Lord shall roar from on high, and from his holy dwelling place he shall give his voice; he roaring shall roar on his fairness; a merry song, as of men treading in pressers [[or in wine presses]], shall be sung against all [[the]] dwellers of earth.
JER 25:31 [[The]] Sound is come unto the last parts of [[the]] earth, for why doom is to the Lord with folks, he is deemed with each flesh; the Lord saith, I have given wicked men to the sword.
JER 25:32 The Lord of hosts saith these things, Lo! torment shall go out from folk into folk, and a great whirlwind shall go out from the ends of [[the]] earth.
JER 25:33 And the slain men of the Lord shall be in that day from the end of the earth unto the end thereof; they shall not be bewailed, neither shall be gathered together, neither shall be buried; they shall lie into a dunghill on the face of [[the]] earth.
JER 25:34 Yell, ye shepherds, and cry, and, ye principals of the flock, besprinkle you with ashes; for your days be [[ful]] filled, that ye be slain, and your scatterings be[[ful]]filled, and ye shall fall as precious vessels.
JER 25:35 And fleeing shall perish from [[the]] shepherds, and saving shall perish from the principals of the flock.
JER 25:36 The voice of the cry of shepherds, and the yelling of the principals of the flock, for the Lord hath wasted the pastures of them.
JER 25:37 And the fields of peace were stilled, for the face of [[the]] wrath of the strong vengeance of the Lord.
JER 25:38 He as a lion hath forsaken his tabernacle, for the land of them is made into desolation, of the face of wrath of the culver, and of the face of wrath of the strong vengeance of the Lord.
JER 26:1 In the beginning of the realm of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word was made of the Lord, and said,
JER 26:2 The Lord said these things, Stand thou in the foreyard of the house of the Lord, and thou shalt speak to all the cities of Judah, from which they come for to worship in the house of the Lord, all the words which I command to thee, that thou speak to them; do not thou withdraw a word;
JER 26:3 if peradventure they hear, and be converted, each man from his evil way, and it repent me of the evil, which I thought to do to them, for the malices of their studies.
JER 26:4 And thou shalt say to them, The Lord saith these things, If ye hear not me, that ye go in my law which I gave to you,
JER 26:5 that ye hear the words of my servants, prophets, which I rising by night, and dressing, sent to you, and ye heard not;
JER 26:6 I shall give this house as Shiloh, and I shall give this city into cursing to all folks of earth.
JER 26:7 And the priests, and prophets, and all the people heard Jeremy speaking these words in the house of the Lord.
JER 26:8 And when Jeremy had [[ful]] filled speaking all things, which the Lord had commanded to him, that he should speak to all the people, the priests, and [[the]] prophets, and all the people took him, and said, Die he by death;
JER 26:9 why prophesied he in the name of the Lord, and said, This house shall be as Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate, for no dweller there is? And all the people was gathered together against Jeremy, in the house of the Lord.
JER 26:10 And the princes of Judah heard all these words; and they ascended [[or went up]] from the king’s house into the house of the Lord, and sat in the entering [[or the entry]] of the new gate of the house of the Lord.
JER 26:11 And the priests and [[the]] prophets spake to the princes, and to all the people, and said, Doom of death is to this man, for he prophesied against this city, as ye heard with your ears.
JER 26:12 And Jeremy said to all the princes, and to all the people, saying, The Lord sent me, that I should prophesy to this house, and to this city, all the words which ye heard.
JER 26:13 Now therefore make ye good your ways, and your studies, and hear ye the voice of your Lord God; and it shall repent the Lord of the evil which he spake against you.
JER 26:14 Lo! forsooth I am in your hands; do ye to me, as it is good and rightful [[or right]] before your eyes.
JER 26:15 Nevertheless know ye, and [[well]] know, that if ye slay me, ye shall betray innocent blood against yourselves, and against this city, and the dwellers thereof; for in truth the Lord sent me to you, that I should speak in your ears all these words.
JER 26:16 And the princes and all the people said to the priests and prophets, Doom of death is not to this man; for he spake to us in the name of our Lord God.
JER 26:17 Therefore men of the elder men of the land rose up, and said to all the company of the people, and spake,
JER 26:18 Micah of Moresheth was a prophet in the days of Hezekiah, king of Judah; and he said to all the people of Judah, saying, The Lord of hosts saith these things, Zion shall be eared as a field, and Jerusalem shall be into an heap of stones, and the hill of the house of the Lord shall be into high things of woods.
JER 26:19 Whether Hezekiah, king of Judah, and all Judah condemned him by death? Whether they dreaded not the Lord, and besought the face of the Lord? and it repented the Lord of the evil which he spake against them. Therefore do we not great evil against our souls.
JER 26:20 Also Urijah, the son of Shemaiah, of Kiriathjearim, was a man prophesying in the name of the Lord; and he prophesied against this city, and against this land, by all the words of Jeremy.
JER 26:21 And king Jehoiakim, and all the mighty men, and princes of them, heard these words; and the king sought to slay him; and Urijah heard, and dreaded, and he fled, and entered into Egypt.
JER 26:22 And king Jehoiakim sent men into Egypt, Elnathan, the son of Achbor, and men with him, into Egypt;
JER 26:23 and they led Urijah out of Egypt, and brought him to king Jehoiakim; and the king killed him with sword, and casted forth his carrion in the sepulchres of the common people unnoble.
JER 26:24 Therefore the hand of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, was with Jeremy, that he was not betaken into the hands of the people, and that it killed not him.
JER 27:1 In the beginning of the realm of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word was made of the Lord to Jeremy, and said,
JER 27:2 The Lord saith these things to me, Make thou to thee bonds and chains, and thou shalt put them in thy neck;
JER 27:3 and thou shalt send those [[or them]] to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the sons of Ammon, and to the king of Tyre, and to the king of Sidon, by the hand of [[the]] messengers that came to Jerusalem, and to Zedekiah, king of Judah.
JER 27:4 And thou shalt command to them, that they speak to their lords, The Lord of hosts, God of Israel saith these things, Ye shall say these things to your lords,
JER 27:5 I made earth, and man, and beasts that be on the face of all earth, in my great strength, and in mine arm holden forth; and I gave it to him that pleased before mine eyes.
JER 27:6 And now therefore I gave all these lands in the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, my servant, the king of Babylon; furthermore and I gave to him the beasts of the field, that they serve him.
JER 27:7 And all folks shall serve him, and his son, and the son of his son, till the time of his land and of him come; and many folks and great kings shall serve him.
JER 27:8 Forsooth the folk and realm that serveth not Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and whoever boweth not his neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, I shall visit on that folk in sword, and hunger, and pestilence, saith the Lord, till I waste them in his hand.
JER 27:9 Therefore do not ye hear your prophets, and false diviners, and dreamers, and diviners by chittering and flying of birds, and witches, that say to you, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon;
JER 27:10 for they prophesy a leasing to you, that they make you far from your land, and cast out you [[or cast you out]], and ye perish.
JER 27:11 Certainly the folk that maketh subject their noll under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serveth him, I shall leave, either deliver, it in his land, saith the Lord; and it shall till that land, and shall dwell therein.
JER 27:12 And I spake by all these words to Zedekiah, king of Judah, and I said, Make ye subject your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve ye him, and his people, and ye shall live.
JER 27:13 Why shall ye die, thou and thy people, by sword, and hunger, and pestilence, as the Lord spake to the folk, that would not serve to the king of Babylon?
JER 27:14 Do not ye hear the words of prophets saying to you, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon; for they speak leasing to you,
JER 27:15 for I sent not them, saith the Lord; and they prophesy falsely in my name, that they cast out you [[or throw you out]], and that ye perish, both ye and the prophets that prophesy to you.
JER 27:16 And I spake to the priests, and to this people, and I said, The Lord God saith these things, Do not ye hear the words of your prophets, that prophesy to you, and say, Lo! the vessels of the Lord shall turn again now soon from Babylon; for they prophesy a leasing to you.
JER 27:17 Therefore do not ye hear them, but serve ye the king of Babylon, that ye live; why is this city given into wilderness?
JER 27:18 And if they be prophets, and if the word of God is in them, run they to the Lord of hosts, that the vessels, which were left in the house of the Lord, and in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem, come not into Babylon.
JER 27:19 For the Lord of hosts saith these things to the pillars, and to the sea, that is, a great washing vessel, and to the foundaments, and to the remnants of [[the]] vessels, that were left in this city,
JER 27:20 which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, took not, when he translated Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, from Jerusalem into Babylon, and all the principal men of Judah and of Jerusalem.
JER 27:21 For the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things to the vessels that be left in the house of the Lord, and in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem,
JER 27:22 They shall be translated, either led over, into Babylon, and shall be there unto the day of their visitation, saith the Lord; and I shall make those [[or them]] to be brought, and to be restored in this place.
JER 28:1 And it was done in that year, in the beginning of the realm of Zedekiah, king of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, Hananiah, the son of Azur, a prophet of Gibeon, said to me in the house of the Lord, before the priests, and all the people, saying,
JER 28:2 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, I have all-broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.
JER 28:3 Yet two years of days there be, and I shall make to be brought again to this place all the vessels of the Lord, which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, took from this place, and translated them into Babylon.
JER 28:4 And I shall turn to this place, saith the Lord, Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, and all the passing over of Judah, that entered into Babylon; for I shall all-break the yoke of the king of Babylon.
JER 28:5 And Jeremy, the prophet, said to Hananiah, the prophet, before the eyes of priests, and before the eyes of all the people that stood in the house of the Lord.
JER 28:6 And Jeremy, the prophet, said to Hananiah, Amen! so do the Lord; the Lord raise thy words which thou prophesiedest, that the vessels be brought again into the house of the Lord, and all the passing over from Babylon, to this place.
JER 28:7 Nevertheless hear thou this word, which I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people.
JER 28:8 Prophets that were before me, and before thee, from the beginning, and prophesied on many lands, and on many realms, of battle, and of torment, and of hunger.
JER 28:9 The prophet that prophesied peace, when his word cometh, shall be known the prophet whom the Lord sent in truth.
JER 28:10 And Hananiah, the prophet, took the chain from the neck of Jeremy, the prophet, and brake it.
JER 28:11 And Hananiah, the prophet, spake in the sight of all the people, saying, The Lord saith these things, So I shall break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, after two years of days, from the neck of all folks. And Jeremy, the prophet, went into his way.
JER 28:12 And the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy, after that Hananiah, the prophet, brake the chain from the neck of Jeremy; and the Lord said,
JER 28:13 Go thou, and say to Hananiah, The Lord saith these things, Thou hast all-broken the chains of wood, and thou shalt make iron chains for them.
JER 28:14 For the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, I have set an iron yoke on the neck of all these folks, that they serve Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and they shall serve him; furthermore and I gave to him the beasts of [[the]] earth.
JER 28:15 And Jeremy, the prophet, said to Hananiah, the prophet, Hananiah, hear thou; the Lord sent not thee, and thou madest this people for to trust in leasing.
JER 28:16 Therefore the Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall send thee out from the face of [[the]] earth; in this year thou shalt die, for thou spakest against the Lord.
JER 28:17 And Hananiah, the prophet, died in that year, in the seventh month.
JER 29:1 And these be the words of the book, which Jeremy, the prophet, sent from Jerusalem to the residues of [[the]] elder men of [[the]] passing over, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the people, whom Nebu-chadnezzar had led over from Jeru-salem into Babylon,
JER 29:2 after that Jeconiah, the king, went out, and the lady, and the honest servants and chaste, and the princes of Judah went out of Jerusalem, and a subtle craftsman, and a goldsmith of Jerusalem,
JER 29:3 in the hand of Elasah, son of Shaphan, and of Gemariah, the son of Hilkiah, which Zedekiah, king of Judah, sent to Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, into Babylon. And Jeremy said,
JER 29:4 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things to all the passing over, which I translated from Jerusalem into Babylon,
JER 29:5 Build ye houses, and inhabit, and plant ye orchards, and eat ye [[the]] fruit of them;
JER 29:6 take ye wives, and engender ye sons and daughters, and give ye wives to your sons, and give ye your daughters to husbands, and bear they sons and daughters; and be ye multiplied there, and do not ye be few in number.
JER 29:7 And seek ye [[the]] peace of the cities, to which I made you to pass over; and pray ye the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof shall be peace to you.
JER 29:8 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Your prophets, that be in the midst of you, and your diviners, deceive you not; and take ye none heed to your dreams, which ye dream;
JER 29:9 for they prophesy falsely to you in my name, and I sent not them, saith the Lord.
JER 29:10 For the Lord saith these things, When seventy years begin to be [[ful]] filled in Babylon, I shall visit you, and I shall raise on you my good word, and I shall bring you again to this place.
JER 29:11 For I know the thoughts which I think on you, saith the Lord, the thoughts of peace, and not of torment, that I give to you an end and patience.
JER 29:12 And ye shall call me to help, and ye shall go, and shall worship me, and I shall hear you;
JER 29:13 ye shall seek me, and ye shall find, when ye seek me in all your heart.
JER 29:14 And I shall be found of you, saith the Lord, and I shall bring again your captivity, and I shall gather you from all folks, and from all places, to which I casted out you [[or put you out]], saith the Lord; and I shall make you to turn again from the place, to which I made you to pass over.
JER 29:15 For ye said, The Lord shall raise prophets to us in Babylon.
JER 29:16 For the Lord saith these things to the king, that sitteth on the seat of David, and to all the people, dweller of this city, to your brethren, that went not out with you into the passing over,
JER 29:17 The Lord of hosts saith these things, Lo! I shall send among them sword, and hunger, and pestilence; and I shall set them as evil figs, that may not be eaten, for those be full evil [[or they be worst]].
JER 29:18 And I shall pursue them in sword, and in hunger, and in pestilence; and I shall give them into travailing in all realms of earth, into cursing, and into wondering, and into scorning, and into shame to all folks, to which I casted [[or cast]] them out.
JER 29:19 For they heard not my words, saith the Lord, which I sent to them by my servants, prophets, and rose by night, and sent, and ye heard not, saith the Lord.
JER 29:20 Therefore all the passing over, which I sent out from Jerusalem into Babylon, hear ye the word of the Lord.
JER 29:21 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things to Ahab, the son of Kolaiah, and to Zedekiah, the son of Maaseiah, that prophesy to you leasing in my name, Lo! I shall betake them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and he shall smite them before your eyes.
JER 29:22 And cursing shall be taken of them to all the passing over of Judah, which is in Babylon, of men saying, The Lord set [[or put]] thee as Zedekiah, and as Ahab, which the king of Babylon fried in fire,
JER 29:23 for they did folly in Israel, and did adultery on the wives of their friends; and they spake a word falsely in my name, which I commanded not to them; I am judge and witness, saith the Lord.
JER 29:24 And thou shalt say to Shemaiah the Nehelamite,
JER 29:25 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, For that that thou sentest books in my name to all the people, which is in Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah, the son of Maaseiah, the priest, and to all the priests, and saidest,
JER 29:26 The Lord gave thee priest for Jehoiada, the priest, that thou be duke in the house of the Lord on each man that is travailed of the fiend, and prophesying, that thou send him into stocks, and into prison.
JER 29:27 And now why blamest thou not Jeremy of Anathoth, that prophesieth to you?
JER 29:28 For on this thing he sent to us into Babylon, and said, It is long; build ye houses, and inhabit, and plant ye orchards, and eat ye the fruit of them.
JER 29:29 Therefore Zephaniah, the priest, read this book in the ears of Jeremy, the prophet.
JER 29:30 And the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy, and said,
JER 29:31 Send thou to all the passing over, and say, The Lord saith these things to Shemaiah the Nehelamite, For that that Shemaiah prophesied to you, and I sent not him, and he made you to trust in a leasing;
JER 29:32 therefore the Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall visit on Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and on his seed; and no man sitting in the midst of this people shall be to him; and he shall not see the good, which I shall do to my people, saith the Lord, for he spake trespassing against the Lord.
JER 30:1 This is the word, that was made of the Lord to Jeremy, and said,
JER 30:2 The Lord God of Israel saith these things, and speaketh, Write to thee in a book, all these words which I spake to thee.
JER 30:3 For lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall turn the turning of my people Israel and Judah, saith the Lord; and I shall turn them to the land which I gave to the fathers of them, and they shall have it in possession.
JER 30:4 And these be the words, which the Lord spake to Israel, and to Judah,
JER 30:5 For the Lord saith these things, We heard a word of dread; inward dread is, and peace is not.
JER 30:6 Ask ye, and see, if a male beareth child; why therefore saw I the hand of each man on his loins, as of a woman travailing of child, and all faces be turned into yellow colour?
JER 30:7 Woe! for that day is great, neither any is like it; and it is a time of tribulation to Jacob, and of him [[he]] shall be saved.
JER 30:8 And it shall be, in that day, saith the Lord of hosts, I shall all-break the yoke of him from thy neck, and I shall break his bonds; and aliens shall no more be lords of it,
JER 30:9 but they shall serve to their Lord God, and to David, their king, whom I shall raise for them.
JER 30:10 Therefore, Jacob, my servant, dread thou not, saith the Lord, and Israel, dread thou not; for lo! I shall save thee from a far land, and thy seed from the land of the captivity of them. And Jacob shall turn again, and shall rest, and shall flow with all goods; and none shall be whom he shall dread.
JER 30:11 For I am with thee, saith the Lord, for to save thee. For I shall make [[full]] ending in all folks, in which I scattered thee; soothly I shall not make thee into [[full]] ending, but I shall chastise thee in doom, that thou be not seen to thee to be guiltless.
JER 30:12 For the Lord saith these things, Thy breaking is uncurable, thy wound is the worst.
JER 30:13 None is, that deemeth thy doom to bind together; the profit of healings is not to thee.
JER 30:14 All thy lovers have forgotten thee, they shall not seek thee; for I have smitten thee with the wound of an enemy, with cruel chastising; for the multitude of thy wickedness, thy sins be made hard.
JER 30:15 What criest thou on thy breaking? thy sorrow is uncurable; for the multitude of thy wickedness, and for thine hard sins, I have done these things to thee.
JER 30:16 Therefore all that eat thee, shall be devoured, and all thine enemies shall be led into captivity; and they that destroy thee, shall be destroyed, and I shall give all thy robbers into raven.
JER 30:17 For I shall heal perfectly thy wound, and I shall make thee whole of thy wounds, saith the Lord; for thou, Zion, they called thee Cast out; this is it that had no seeker.
JER 30:18 The Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall turn the turning of the tabernacles of Jacob, and I shall have mercy on the houses of him; and the city shall be builded [[up]] in his highness, and the temple shall be founded by his order.
JER 30:19 And praising and the voice of players shall go out of them, and I shall multiply them, and they shall not be decreased; and I shall glorify them, and they shall not be made thin.
JER 30:20 And the sons thereof shall be as at the beginning, and the company thereof shall dwell before me; and I shall visit against all that do tribulation to it.
JER 30:21 And the duke thereof shall be of it, and a prince shall be brought forth of the midst thereof; and I shall join him, and he shall nigh to me; for who is this, that shall join his heart, that he nigh to me? saith the Lord.
JER 30:22 And ye shall be into a people to me, and I shall be into God to you.
JER 30:23 Lo! the whirlwind of the Lord, a strong vengeance going out, a tempest falling down, shall rest in the head of wicked men.
JER 30:24 The Lord shall not turn away the ire [[or the wrath]] of indignation, till he do, and [[ful]] fill the thought of his heart; in the last days ye shall understand those things.
JER 31:1 In that time, saith the Lord, I shall be God to all the kindreds of Israel; and they shall be into a people to me.
JER 31:2 The Lord saith these things, The people that was left of sword, found grace in desert; Israel shall go to his rest.
JER 31:3 Far the Lord appeared to me, and in everlasting charity I loved thee; therefore I doing mercy drew thee.
JER 31:4 And again I shall build thee, and thou, virgin Israel, shalt be builded; yet thou shalt be adorned with thy tympans, and shalt go out in the quire, either company, of players.
JER 31:5 Yet thou shalt plant vines in the hills [[or the mount]] of Samaria; men planting shall plant, and till the time come, they shall not gather grapes.
JER 31:6 For why a day shall be, wherein keepers shall cry in the hill [[or the mount]] of Samaria, and in the hill [[or the mount]] of Ephraim, Rise ye, and ascend we [[or go we up]] into Zion, to our Lord God.
JER 31:7 For the Lord saith these things, Jacob, make ye full out joy in gladness, and neigh ye against the head of heathen men; sound ye, sing ye, and say ye, Lord, save thy people, the residues of Israel.
JER 31:8 Lo! I shall bring them from the land of the north, and I shall gather them from the farthest parts of [[the]] earth; among which shall be a blind man, and crooked, and a woman with child, and travailing of child together, a great company of them that shall turn again hither.
JER 31:9 They shall come in weeping, and I shall bring them again in mercy; and I shall bring them by the strands [[or streams]] of waters in a rightful [[or right]] way, they shall not spurn therein; for I am made a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my engendered son.
JER 31:10 Ye heathen men, hear the word of the Lord, and tell ye in isles that be [[a]] far, and say, He that scattered Israel, shall gather it, and shall keep it, as a shepherd keepeth his flock.
JER 31:11 For the Lord again-bought Jacob, and delivered him from the hand of the mightier.
JER 31:12 And they shall come, and praise in the hill [[or the mount]] of Zion; and they shall flow together to the goods of the Lord, on wheat, wine, and oil, and on the fruit of sheep, and of neat; and the soul of them shall be as a watery garden, and they shall no more hunger.
JER 31:13 Then a virgin shall be glad in a company, young men and eld together; and I shall turn the mourning of them into joy, and I shall comfort them, and I shall make them glad of their sorrow.
JER 31:14 And I shall greatly fill the soul of [[the]] priests with fatness, and my people shall be [[ful]] filled with my goods, saith the Lord.
JER 31:15 The Lord saith these things, A voice of wailing, and of weeping, and of mourning, was heard on high; the voice of Rachel beweeping her sons, and not willing to be comforted on them, for they be not.
JER 31:16 The Lord saith these things, Thy voice rest of weeping, and thine eyes rest of tears; for why meed is to thy work, saith the Lord; and they shall turn again from the land of the enemy.
JER 31:17 And hope is to thy last things, saith the Lord; and thy sons shall turn again to their ends.
JER 31:18 I hearing heard Ephraim passing over; saying, thou chastisedest me, and I am learned as a young one untamed, either wild; turn thou me, and I shall be turned again, for thou art my Lord God.
JER 31:19 For after that thou convertedest me, I did penance; and after that thou showedest to me, I smote mine hip; I am ashamed, and I am shamed, for I suffered the shame of my youth.
JER 31:20 For Ephraim is a worshipful son to me, for he is a delicate child; for since I spake of him, yet I shall have mind on him; therefore mine entrails be troubled on him, I doing mercy shall have mercy on him, saith the Lord.
JER 31:21 Ordain to thee an high lookout place, set to thee bitternesses; dress thine heart into a straight way, in which thou went; turn again, thou virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities.
JER 31:22 How long, daughter of unsteadfast dwelling, art thou made dissolute in delights? for the Lord hath made a new thing on earth, a woman shall compass a man.
JER 31:23 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Yet they shall say this word in the land of Judah, and in the cities thereof, when I shall turn the captivity of them, The Lord bless thee, thou fairness of rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], thou holy hill [[or mount]].
JER 31:24 And Judah, and all the cities thereof shall dwell in it together, earth-tillers, and they that drive flocks.
JER 31:25 For I filled greatly a faint soul, and I have [[full-]]filled each hungry soul.
JER 31:26 Therefore I am as raised from sleep, and I saw; and my sleep was sweet to me.
JER 31:27 Lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of men, and with the seed of work beasts.
JER 31:28 And as I waked on them, to draw up by the root, and to destroy, and to scatter, and to lose, and to torment; so I shall wake on or watch over them, to build, and to plant, saith the Lord.
JER 31:29 In those days they shall no more say, The fathers ate a sour grape, and the teeth of [[the]] sons were astonied;
JER 31:30 but each man shall die in his wickedness, each man that eateth a sour grape, his teeth shall be astonied.
JER 31:31 Lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall smite a new bond of peace to the house of Israel, and to the house of Judah;
JER 31:32 not by the covenant which I made with your fathers, in the day in which I took the hand of them, to lead them out of the land of Egypt, the covenant which they made void; and I was Lord of them, saith the Lord.
JER 31:33 But this shall be the covenant, which I shall smite with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord; I shall give my law in the entrails of them, and I shall write it in the heart of them, and I shall be into God to them, and they shall be into a people to me.
JER 31:34 And a man shall no more teach his neighbour, and a man his brother, and say, Know thou the Lord; for all shall know me, from the least of them unto the most, saith the Lord; for I shall be merciful to the wickednesses of them, and I shall no more be mindful on the sin of them.
JER 31:35 The Lord saith these things, that giveth the sun in the light of day, the order of the moon and of the stars in the light of the night, which troubleth the sea, and the waves thereof sound, the Lord of hosts is name to him.
JER 31:36 If these laws fail before me, saith the Lord, then and the seed of Israel shall fail, that it be not a folk before me in all days.
JER 31:37 The Lord saith these things, If heavens above may be measured, and the foundaments of [[the]] earth beneath be sought out, and I shall cast away all the seed of Israel, for all things which they did, saith the Lord.
JER 31:38 Lo! days come, saith the Lord, and a city shall be builded to the Lord, from the tower of Hananeel unto the gate of the corner.
JER 31:39 And it shall go out over the rule of [[the]] measure, in the sight thereof, on the hill [[of]] Gareb, and it shall compass Goath,
JER 31:40 and all the valley of carrions, and it shall compass[[the]] ashes, and all the country of death, unto the strand [[or stream]] of Kidron, and to the corner of the east gate of horses; the holy thing of the Lord shall not be drawn out, and it shall no more be destroyed without end.
JER 32:1 The word that was made of the Lord to Jeremy, in the tenth year of Zedekiah, king of Judah; that is the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar.
JER 32:2 Then the host of the king of Babylon besieged Jerusalem; and Jeremy, the prophet, was enclosed in the porch of the prison, that was in the house of the king of Judah.
JER 32:3 For why Zedekiah, the king of Judah, had enclosed him, and said, Why prophesiest thou, saying, The Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall give this city in[[to]] the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it;
JER 32:4 and Zedekiah, king of Judah, shall not escape from the hand of Chaldees, but he shall be betaken into the hand of the king of Babylon; and his mouth shall speak with the mouth of him, and his eyes shall see the eyes of him;
JER 32:5 and he shall lead Zedekiah into Babylon, and he shall be there, till I visit him, saith the Lord; forsooth if ye fight against [[the]] Chaldees, ye shall have nothing in prosperity?
JER 32:6 And Jeremy said, The word of the Lord was made to me, and said,
JER 32:7 Lo! Hanameel, the son of Shallum, the son of thy father’s brother, shall come to thee, and say, Buy thou to thee my field, which is in Anathoth; for it befalleth to thee by nigh kindred, that thou buy it.
JER 32:8 And Hanameel, the son of my father’s brother, came to me, by the word of the Lord, to the porch of the prison, and said to me, Wield thou my field, which is in Anathoth, in the land of Benjamin; for why the heritage befalleth to thee, and thou art the next of blood, that thou wield it. Forsooth I understood, that it was the word of the Lord.
JER 32:9 And I bought the field, which is in Anathoth, of Hanameel, the son of my father’s brother. And I paid to him silver, seven staters, and ten pieces of silver;
JER 32:10 and I wrote in a book, and I sealed, and I gave witnesses. And I weighed silver in a balance;
JER 32:11 and I took the book asealed of possession, and [[the]] askings and [[the]] answerings of the seller and [[the]] buyer, and [[the]] covenants, and [[the]] seals withoutforth.
JER 32:12 And I gave the book of possession to Baruch, the son of Neriah, son of Maaseiah, before the eyes of Hanameel, the son of my father’s brother, and before the eyes of witnesses that were written in the book of [[the]] buying, before the eyes of all Jews, that sat in the porch of the prison.
JER 32:13 And I commanded to Baruch before them, and I said,
JER 32:14 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Take thou these books, this sealed book of buying, and this book which is open, and put thou those [[or them]] in an earthen vessel, that they may dwell many days.
JER 32:15 For why the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Yet houses, and fields, and vines shall be wielded in this land.
JER 32:16 And I prayed to the Lord, after that I betook the book of possession to Baruch, the son of Neriah; and I said,
JER 32:17 Alas! alas! alas! Lord God, Lord, thou madest heaven and earth in thy great strength, and in thine arm stretched forth; each word shall not be hard to thee;
JER 32:18 which doest mercy in thousands, and yieldest the wickedness of fathers into the bosom of their sons after them. Thou strongest, great, mighty, Lord of hosts is name to thee;
JER 32:19 great in counsel, and uncompre-hensible in thought, whose eyes be open on all the ways of the sons of Adam, that thou yield to each after his ways, and after the fruit of his findings;
JER 32:20 which settedest signs and great wonders in the land of Egypt, unto this day, both in Israel, and in men; and madest to thee a name, as this day is.
JER 32:21 And thou leddest thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt, in signs and in great wonders, and in a strong hand, and in an arm holden forth, and in great dread;
JER 32:22 and thou gavest to them this land, which thou sworest to the fathers of them, that thou wouldest give to them, a land flowing with milk and honey.
JER 32:23 And they entered, and had it in possession; and they obeyed not to thy voice, and they went not in thy law; all things which thou commandedest to them to do, they did not; and all these evils befell to them.
JER 32:24 Lo! strongholds be builded against the city, that it be taken, and the city is given into the hands of Chaldees, and into the hands of the king of Babylon, that fight against it, of the face of [[the]] sword, and of hunger, and of pestilence; and whatever things thou spakest, befell, as thou thyself seest.
JER 32:25 And thou saidest to me, Lord God, Buy thou a field for silver, and give thou witnesses, when the city is given in the hands of Chaldees.
JER 32:26 And the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy, and said,
JER 32:27 Lo! I am the Lord God of all flesh. Whether any word shall be hard to me?
JER 32:28 Therefore the Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall betake this city into the hands of Chaldees, and into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it.
JER 32:29 And Chaldees shall come, and fight against this city, and they shall burn it with fire, and they shall burn it, and [[the]] houses, in whose roofs they sacrificed to Baal, and offered moist sacrifices to alien gods, to stir me to wrath.
JER 32:30 For why the sons of Israel, and the sons of Judah, did evil continually, from their young waxing age, before mine eyes; the sons of Israel, which till to now wrathed me by the work of their hands, saith the Lord.
JER 32:31 For why this city is made to me in my strong vengeance and indignation, from the day in which they built it, unto this day, in which it shall be taken away from my sight;
JER 32:32 for the malice of the sons of Israel, and of the sons of Judah, which they did, stirring me to wrath-fulness, they, and the kings of them, the princes of them, and the priests, and prophets of them, the men of Judah, and the dwellers of Jerusalem.
JER 32:33 And they turned to me the backs, and not the faces, when I taught, and informed them early; and they would not hear, that they should take teaching.
JER 32:34 And they setted their idols in the house, in which my name is called to help, that they should defoul it.
JER 32:35 And they builded high things to Baal, that be in the valley of the sons of Hinnom, that they should hallow their sons and their daughters to Molech, which thing I commanded not to them, neither it ascended [[or went up]] into mine heart, that they should do this abomination, and bring [[down]] Judah into sin.
JER 32:36 And now for these things, the Lord God of Israel saith these things to this city, of which ye say, that it shall be betaken into the hands of the king of Babylon, in sword, and in hunger, and in pestilence,
JER 32:37 Lo! I shall gather them from all lands, to which I casted them out in my strong vengeance, and in my wrath, and in great indignation; and I shall bring them again to this place, and I shall make them to dwell trustily.
JER 32:38 And they shall be into a people to me, and I shall be into God to them.
JER 32:39 And I shall give to them one heart, and one soul, that they dread me in all days, and that it be well to them, and to their sons after them.
JER 32:40 And I shall smite to them a covenant everlasting, and I shall not cease to do well to them, and I shall give my dread in the heart of them, that they go not away from me.
JER 32:41 And I shall be glad on them, when I shall do well to them; and I shall plant them in this land in truth, in all mine heart, and in all my soul.
JER 32:42 For the Lord saith these things, As I brought on this people all this great evil, so I shall bring on them all the good, which I shall speak to them.
JER 32:43 And fields shall be wielded in this land, of which ye say, that it is desert, for no man and beast is left; and it is given into the hands of Chaldees.
JER 32:44 Fields shall be bought for money, and shall be written in a book, and a seal shall be imprinted; and witnesses shall be given, in the land of Benjamin, and in the compass of Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities in [[the]] hilly places, and in the cities in [[the]] field places, and in the cities that be at the south; for I shall turn the captivity of them, saith the Lord.
JER 33:1 And the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy, in the second time, when he was enclosed yet in the porch of the prison, and said,
JER 33:2 The Lord saith these things, The Lord is name of him that shall do, and form, and make ready that thing;
JER 33:3 Cry thou to me, and I shall hear thee, and I shall tell to thee great things, and steadfast, which thou knowest not.
JER 33:4 For the Lord God of Israel saith these things to the houses of this city, and to the houses of the king of Judah, that be destroyed, and to the strongholds, and to the sword of men
JER 33:5 coming to fight with Chaldees, and to fill those houses with carrions of men, which I smote in my strong vengeance, and in mine indignation; and I hid my face from this city, for all the malice of them.
JER 33:6 Lo! I shall close together to them a wound and health, and I shall make them whole, and I shall show to them the beseeching of peace and of truth;
JER 33:7 and I shall convert the conversion of Judah, and I shall convert the conversion of Jerusalem, and I shall build them [[up]], as at the beginning.
JER 33:8 And I shall cleanse them from all their wickedness, in which they sinned to me, and I shall be merciful to all the wickednesses of them, in which they trespassed to me, and forsook me.
JER 33:9 And they shall be to me into a name, and into joy, and into praising, and into full out joying to all folks of earth, that heard all the goods which I shall do to them; and they shall dread, and shall be troubled in all goods, and in all the peace, which I shall do to them.
JER 33:10 The Lord saith these things, Yet in this place, which ye say to be forsaken, for no man is, neither beast, in the cities of Judah, and in the gates of Jerusalem, that be desolate, without man, and without dweller, and without beast,
JER 33:11 the voice of joy shall be heard, and the voice of gladness, the voice of spouse, and the voice of spousess, the voice of men, saying, Acknowledge ye to the Lord of hosts, for the Lord is good, for his mercy is without end, and of men bearing vows into the house of the Lord; for I shall bring again the conversion of the land, as at the beginning, saith the Lord.
JER 33:12 The Lord of hosts saith these things, Yet in this forsaken place, without man, and without beast, and in all cities thereof, shall be a dwelling place of shepherds, of flocks lying.
JER 33:13 And in the cities in [[the]] hilly places, and in the cities in [[the]] field places, and in the cities that be at the south, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the compass of Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, yet flocks shall pass, at the hand of the numberer, saith the Lord.
JER 33:14 Lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall raise the good word, which I spake to the house of Israel, and to the house of Judah.
JER 33:15 In those days, and in that time, I shall make the seed of rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] to burgeon to David, and he shall make doom and rightful-ness [[or rightwiseness]] in [[the]] earth.
JER 33:16 In those days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell trustily; and this is the name which they shall call him, Our rightful Lord [[or The Lord our rightwiseness]].
JER 33:17 For the Lord saith these things, A man of David shall not perish, that shall sit on the throne of the house of Israel;
JER 33:18 and of [[the]] priests and deacons, a man shall not perish from my face, that shall offer burnt sacrifices, and burn sacrifices, and slay sacrifices, in all days.
JER 33:19 And the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy, and said,
JER 33:20 The Lord saith these things, If my covenant with the day, and my covenant with the night, may be made void, that the day and the night be not in his time;
JER 33:21 and my covenant with David, my servant, may be voided, that of him be no son, that shall reign in his throne, and no deacons, and priests, my ministers;
JER 33:22 as the stars of heaven may not be numbered, and the gravel of the sea may not be meted [[or measured]], so I shall multiply the seed of David, my servant, and deacons, my ministers.
JER 33:23 And the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy, and said,
JER 33:24 Whether thou hast not seen, that this people spake, saying, Two kindreds which the Lord chose, be cast away, and they despised my people, for it is no more a folk before them.
JER 33:25 The Lord saith these things, If I setted not my covenant betwixt day and night, and if I setted not laws to heaven and earth;
JER 33:26 soothly and I shall cast away the seed of Jacob, and of David, my servant, that I take not of the seed of him princes of the seed of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; for I shall bring again the conversion of them, and I shall have mercy on them.
JER 34:1 The word that was made of the Lord to Jeremy, when Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and all his host, and all the realms of [[the]] earth, that were under the power of his hand, and all peoples fought against Jerusalem, and against all cities thereof; and he said,
JER 34:2 The Lord God of Israel saith these things, Go thou, and speak to Zedekiah, king of Judah; and thou shalt say to him, The Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall betake this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it by fire.
JER 34:3 And thou shalt not escape from his hand, but thou shalt be taken by taking, and thou shalt be betaken into his hand; and thine eyes shall see the eyes of the king of Babylon, and his mouth shall speak with thy mouth, and thou shalt enter into Babylon.
JER 34:4 Nevertheless Zedekiah, the king of Judah, hear thou the word of the Lord; the Lord saith these things to thee, Thou shalt not die by sword,
JER 34:5 but thou shalt die in peace; and by the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings that were before thee, so they shall burn thee, and they shall bewail thee, Woe! lord; for I spake a word, saith the Lord.
JER 34:6 And Jeremy, the prophet, spake to Zedekiah, king of Judah, all these words in Jerusalem.
JER 34:7 And the host of the king of Babylon fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah, that were left; against Lachish, and against Azekah; for why these strong cities were left of the cities of Judah.
JER 34:8 The word that was made of the Lord to Jeremy, after that king Zedekiah smote bond of peace with all the people in Jerusalem, and preached,
JER 34:9 that each man should deliver his servant, and each man his handmaid, an Hebrew man and an Hebrew woman, free, and that they should not be lords of them, that is, in a Jew, and their brother.
JER 34:10 Therefore all the princes and all the people heard, which made covenant, that they should deliver each man his servant, and each man his handmaid, free, and should no more be lords of them; therefore they heard, and delivered;
JER 34:11 and they were turned afterward, and drew again their servants, and handmaids, which they had let go free, and they made them subject into servants, and into servantesses.
JER 34:12 And the word of the Lord was made of the Lord to Jeremy, and said,
JER 34:13 The Lord God of Israel saith these things, I smote a bond of peace with your fathers, in the day in which I led them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of servage; and I said,
JER 34:14 When seven years be [[ful]] filled, each man deliver his brother, an Hebrew man, which is sold to him, and he shall serve thee six years, and thou shalt deliver him from thee; and your fathers heard not me, neither bowed [[in]] their ear.
JER 34:15 And ye be converted today, and ye did that, that is rightful [[or right]] before mine eyes, that ye preached each man freedom to his friend, and ye made covenant in my sight, in the house wherein my name is called to help on that freedom.
JER 34:16 And ye turned again, and defouled my name, and ye brought again each man his servant, and each man his handmaid, which ye delivered, that they should be free, and of their own power; and ye made them subject, that they be servants and handmaids to you.
JER 34:17 Therefore the Lord saith these things, Ye heard not me, that ye preached freedom, each man to his brother, and each man to his friend; lo! I preach to you freedom, saith the Lord, and to sword, and to hunger, and to pestilence; and I shall give you into stirring to all realms of earth.
JER 34:18 And I shall give the men, that brake my bond of peace, and kept not the words of [[the]] bond of peace, to which they assented in my sight, and kept not the calf which they cutted into two parts;
JER 34:19 and the princes of Judah, and the princes of Jerusalem, and the honest servants, and priests went between the partings thereof, and all the people of the land, that went between the partings of the calf;
JER 34:20 and I shall give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life; and the dead carrion of them shall be into meat to the volatiles [[or fowls]] of the air, and to the beasts of earth.
JER 34:21 And I shall give Zedekiah, the king of Judah, and his princes, into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, and into the hand of the hosts of the king of Babylon, that went away from you.
JER 34:22 Lo! I command, saith the Lord, and I shall bring them again into this city; and they shall fight against it, and shall take it, and shall burn it with fire; and I shall give the cities of Judah into wilderness, for there is no dweller.
JER 35:1 The word that was made of the Lord to Jeremy, in the days of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah, and said,
JER 35:2 Go thou to the house of Rechabites, and speak thou to them; and thou shalt bring them into the house of the Lord, into one chamber of [[the]] treasuries [[or treasures]], and thou shalt give to them to drink wine.
JER 35:3 And I took Jaazaniah, the son of Jeremy, son of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all the sons of him, and all the house of Rechabites.
JER 35:4 And I led them into the house of the Lord, to the treasury of the sons of Hanan, son of Igdaliah, the man of God; which treasury was beside the treasury of [[the]] princes, above the treasury of Maaseiah, son of Shallum, that was keeper of the vestiary.
JER 35:5 And I setted before the sons of the house of Rechabites pecks, and great cups full of wine; and I said to them, Drink ye wine.
JER 35:6 And they answered, We shall not drink wine; for why Jonadab, our father, the son of Rechab, commanded to us, and said, Ye shall not drink wine, ye and your sons, till into without end;
JER 35:7 and ye shall not build an house, and ye shall not sow seed, and ye shall not plant vines, neither shall have, but ye shall dwell in tabernacles in all your days, that ye live many days on the face of [[the]] earth, in which ye go in pilgrimage.
JER 35:8 Therefore we obeyed to the voice of Jonadab, our father, the son of Rechab, in all things which he commanded to us; so that we drank not wine in all our days, we, and our women, our sons, and daughters;
JER 35:9 and we builded not houses to dwell, and we had not a vinery [[or vineyards]], and a field, and seed;
JER 35:10 but we dwelled in tabernacles, and were obeying, and did by all things, which Jonadab, our father, commanded to us.
JER 35:11 But when Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, had ascended [[or gone up]] to this land, we said, Come ye, and enter we into Jerusalem, from the face of the host of Chaldees, and from the face of the host of Syria; and we dwelled in Jerusalem.
JER 35:12 And the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy, and said,
JER 35:13 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Go thou, and say to the men of Judah, and to the dwellers of Jerusalem, Whether ye shall not take teaching, that ye obey to my words, saith the Lord?
JER 35:14 The words of Jonadab, son of Rechab, had the mastery, which he commanded to his sons, that they should not drink wine; and they drink not, unto this day; for they obeyed to the commandment of their father; but I spake to you, and I rose full early, and spake, and ye obeyed not to me.
JER 35:15 And I sent to you all my servants prophets, and I rose full early, and I sent, and said, Be ye converted, each man from his worst way, and make ye good your studies, and do not ye follow alien gods, neither worship ye them, and ye shall dwell in the land, which I gave to you, and to your fathers; and ye bowed not [[in]] your ear, neither heard me.
JER 35:16 Therefore the sons of Jonadab, son of Rechab, made steadfast the commandment of their father, which he commanded to them; but this people obeyed not to me.
JER 35:17 Therefore the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Lo! I shall bring on Judah, and on all the dwellers of Jerusalem, all the torment which I spake against them; for I spake to them, and they heard not; I called them, and they answered not to me.
JER 35:18 Forsooth Jeremy said to the house of Rechabites, The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, For that that ye obeyed to the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his commandments, and did all things, which he commanded to you;
JER 35:19 therefore the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, A man of the generation of Jonadab, son of Rechab, shall not fail standing in my sight in all days.
JER 36:1 And it was done, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word was made of the Lord to Jeremy, and said,
JER 36:2 Take thou the volume of a book, and thou shalt write therein all the words, which I spake to thee against Israel and Judah, and against all folks, from the day in which I spake to thee, from the days of Josiah unto this day.
JER 36:3 If peradventure when the house of Judah heareth all the evils which I think to do to them, each man turn again from his worst way, and I shall be merciful to the wickedness and sin of them.
JER 36:4 Therefore Jeremy called Baruch, the son of Neriah; and Baruch wrote of the mouth of Jeremy in the volume of a book all the words of the Lord, which he spake to him.
JER 36:5 And Jeremy commanded to Baruch, and said, I am enclosed, and I may not enter into the house of the Lord.
JER 36:6 Therefore enter thou, and read of the book, in which thou hast written of my mouth the words of the Lord, in hearing of the people, in the house of the Lord, in the day of fasting; furthermore and in hearing of all Judah, that come from their cities, thou shalt read to them;
JER 36:7 if peradventure the prayer of them fall in the sight of the Lord, and each man turn again from his worst way; for why the strong vengeance and indignation is great, which the Lord spake against this people.
JER 36:8 And Baruch, the son of Neriah, did after all things, which Jeremy, the prophet, commanded to him; and he read of the book the words of the Lord, in the house of the Lord.
JER 36:9 Forsooth it was done, in the fifth year of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah, in the ninth month, they preached fasting in the sight of the Lord, to all the people in Jerusalem, and to all the multitude, that came together from the cities of Judah into Jerusalem.
JER 36:10 And Baruch read of the volume the words of Jeremy, in the house of the Lord, in the treasury of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, scribe, in the higher porch, in the entering of the new gate of the house of the Lord, in audience of all the people.
JER 36:11 And when Michaiah, the son of Gemariah, son of Shaphan, had heard all the words of the Lord, of the book,
JER 36:12 he went down into the house of the king, to the treasury of the scribe. And lo! all the princes sat there, Elishama, the scribe, and Delaiah, the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan, the son of Achbor, and Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah, the son of Hananiah, and all [[the]] princes.
JER 36:13 And Michaiah told to them all the words, which he heard Baruch reading of the book, in the ears of the people.
JER 36:14 Therefore all the princes sent to Baruch Jehudi, the son of Nethaniah, son of Shelemiah, son of Cushi, and said, Take in thine hand the book, of which thou readest in audience of the people, and come thou. Therefore Baruch, the son of Neriah, took the book in his hand, and came to them.
JER 36:15 And they said to him, Sit thou, and read these things in our ears; and Baruch read in the ears of them.
JER 36:16 Therefore when they had heard all the words, they wondered each man to his neighbour, and they said to Baruch, Ought we to tell to the king all these words?
JER 36:17 And they asked him, and said, Show thou to us, how thou hast written all these words of his mouth.
JER 36:18 Forsooth Baruch said to them, Of his mouth he spake, as reading to me, all these words; and I wrote in a book with ink.
JER 36:19 And all the princes said to Baruch, Go, be thou hid, thou and Jeremy; and no man know where ye be.
JER 36:20 And they entered to the king, into the hall; forsooth they betook the book to be kept into the treasury of Elishama, the scribe. And they told all the words, in audience of the king.
JER 36:21 Therefore the king sent Jehudi, that he should take the book. Which took the book from the treasury of Elishama, the scribe, and read in audience of the king, and of all the princes that stood about the king.
JER 36:22 Forsooth the king sat in the winter house, in the ninth month; and a pan full of coals was set before him.
JER 36:23 And when Jehudi had read three pages, either four, he cutted it with the knife of a scribe, and casted into the fire, that was in the pan, till all the book was wasted by the fire, that was in the pan.
JER 36:24 And the king, and all his servants, that heard all these words, dreaded not, neither rent their clothes.
JER 36:25 Nevertheless Elnathan, and Delaiah, and Gemariah against-said [[to]] the king, that he should not burn the book; and he heard not them.
JER 36:26 And the king commanded to Jerahmeel, son of Hammelech, and to Seraiah, son of Azriel, and to Shelem-iah, son of Abdeel, that they should take Baruch, the writer, and Jeremy, the prophet; forsooth the Lord hid them.
JER 36:27 And the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy, the prophet, after that the king had burnt the book, and [[the]] words, which Baruch had written of Jeremy’s mouth; and he said,
JER 36:28 Again take thou another book, and write therein all the former words, that were in the first book, which Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, burnt.
JER 36:29 And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim, king of Judah, The Lord saith these things, Thou burntest that book, and saidest, What hast thou written therein, telling, The king of Babylon shall come hasting, and shall destroy this land, and shall make man and beast to cease thereof?
JER 36:30 Therefore the Lord saith these things against Jehoiakim, king of Judah, None there shall be of him, that shall sit on the seat of David; and his carrion shall be cast forth to the heat by day, and to the frost by night.
JER 36:31 And I shall visit against him, and against his seed, and against his servants, their wickednesses. And I shall bring on them, and on the dwellers of Jerusalem, and on the men of Judah, all the evil which I spake to them, and they heard not.
JER 36:32 Forsooth Jeremy took another book, and gave it to Baruch, the writer, the son of Neriah, which wrote therein of Jeremy’s mouth all the words of the book, which book Jehoiakim, king of Judah, had burnt by fire; and furthermore many more words were added than were before.
JER 37:1 And king Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, reigned for Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, made king in the land of Judah.
JER 37:2 And he, and his servants, and his people obeyed not to the words of the Lord, which he spake in the hand of Jeremy, the prophet.
JER 37:3 And king Zedekiah sent Jehucal, the son of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah, the priest, the son of Maaseiah, to Jeremy, the prophet, and said, Pray thou for us our Lord God.
JER 37:4 Forsooth Jeremy went freely in the midst of the people; for they had not sent him into the keeping of the prison.
JER 37:5 Therefore the host of Pharaoh went out of Egypt, and [[the]] Chaldees, that besieged Jerusalem, heard such a message, and went away from Jeru-salem.
JER 37:6 And the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy, the prophet, and said,
JER 37:7 The Lord God of Israel saith these things, Thus ye shall say to the king of Judah, that sent you to ask me, Lo! the host of Pharaoh, which went out to you into help, shall turn again into his land, into Egypt.
JER 37:8 And Chaldees shall come again, and shall fight against this city, and shall take it, and shall burn it with fire.
JER 37:9 The Lord saith these things, Do not ye deceive your souls, saying, Chaldees going shall go away, and shall depart from us; for they shall not go away.
JER 37:10 But though ye slay all the host of Chaldees, that fight against you, and some wounded men of them be left, each man shall rise from his tent, and they shall burn this city with fire.
JER 37:11 Therefore when the host of Chaldees had gone away from Jerusalem, for the host of Pharaoh,
JER 37:12 Jeremy went out of Jerusalem, to go into the land of Benjamin, and to part there the possession in the sight of [[the]] citizens.
JER 37:13 And when he was come to the gate of Benjamin, there was a keeper of the gate by whiles, Irijah by name, the son of Shelemiah, son of Hananiah; and he took Jeremy, the prophet, and said, Thou fleest to [[the]] Chaldees.
JER 37:14 And Jeremy answered, It is false; I flee not to [[the]] Chaldees. And he heard not Jeremy, but Irijah took Jeremy, and brought him to the princes.
JER 37:15 Wherefore the princes were wroth against Jeremy, and beat him, and sent him into the prison, that was in the house of Jonathan, the scribe; for he was sovereign on the prison.
JER 37:16 Therefore Jeremy entered into the house of the pit, and into the prison of travail; and Jeremy sat there many days.
JER 37:17 Therefore king Zedekiah sent, and took him away, and asked him privily in his house, and said, Guessest thou, whether a word is of the Lord? And Jeremy said, There is. And Jeremy said, Thou shalt be betaken into the hand of the king of Babylon.
JER 37:18 And Jeremy said to Zedekiah, the king, What have I sinned to thee, and to thy servants, and to thy people, for thou hast sent me into the house of [[the]] prison?
JER 37:19 Where be your prophets, that prophesied to you, and said, The king of Babylon shall not come [[up]] on you, and on this land?
JER 37:20 Now therefore, my lord the king, I beseech, hear thou, my prayer be worthy in thy sight, and send thou not me again into the house of Jonathan, the scribe, lest I die there.
JER 37:21 Therefore Zedekiah commanded, that Jeremy should be betaken into the porch of the prison, and that a cake of bread should be given to him each day, without stew, till all the loaves of the city were wasted; and Jeremy dwelled in the porch of the prison.
JER 38:1 Forsooth Shephatiah, son of Mattan, and Gedaliah, son of Pashur, and Jucal, son of Shelemiah, and Pashur, son of Malchiah, heard the words which Jeremy spake to all the people, saying,
JER 38:2 The Lord saith these things, Who-ever dwelleth in this city, shall die by sword, and hunger, and pestilence; but he that fleeth to [[the]] Chaldees, shall live, and his soul shall be whole and living.
JER 38:3 The Lord saith these things, This city to be betaken shall be betaken into the hand of the host of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it.
JER 38:4 And the princes said to the king, We pray, that this man be slain; for of before-casting he discomforteth or weakeneth the hands of men warriors, that dwelled in this city, and the hands of all the people, and speaketh to them by all these words. For why this man seeketh not peace to this people, but evil.
JER 38:5 And king Zedekiah said, Lo! he is in your hands, for it is not leaveful that the king deny anything to you.
JER 38:6 Therefore they took Jeremy, and casted him down into the pit of Malchiah, the son of Hammelech, which was in the porch of the prison; and they sent down Jeremy by cords into the pit, wherein was no water, but fen; therefore Jeremy went down into the filth.
JER 38:7 Forsooth Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, a chaste man and honest, heard, that was in the king’s house, that they had sent Jeremy into the pit; soothly the king sat in the gate of Benjamin.
JER 38:8 And Ebedmelech went out of the king’s house, and spake to the king, and said,
JER 38:9 My lord the king, these men did evil all things, whatever things they did against Jeremy, the prophet, sending him into the pit, that he die there for hunger; for why loaves be no more in the city.
JER 38:10 Therefore the king commanded to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, and said, Take with thee thirty men from hence, and raise thou [[up]] Jeremy, the prophet, from the pit, before that he die.
JER 38:11 Therefore when Ebedmelech had taken men with him, he entered into the house of the king, that was under the cellar; and he took from thence old clothes, and old rags, that were rotten; and he sent them down to Jeremy, into the pit, by cords.
JER 38:12 And Ebedmelech the Ethiopian said to Jeremy, Put thou [[the]] old clothes, and these rent and rotten things under the cubit of thine hands, and on the cords. Therefore Jeremy did so.
JER 38:13 And they drew out Jeremy with cords, and led him out of the pit. Forsooth Jeremy dwelled in the porch of the prison.
JER 38:14 And king Zedekiah sent, and took [[to]] him Jeremy, the prophet, at the third door that was in the house of the Lord. And the king said to Jeremy, I ask of thee a word; hide thou not anything from me.
JER 38:15 Forsooth Jeremy said to Zedekiah, If I tell to thee, whether thou shalt not slay me? And if I give counsel to thee, thou shalt not hear me.
JER 38:16 Therefore Zedekiah the king swore to Jeremy privily, and said, The Lord liveth, that made to us this soul, I shall not slay thee, and I shall not betake thee into the hands of these men, that seek thy life.
JER 38:17 And Jeremy said to Zedekiah, The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, If thou goest forth, and goest out to the princes of the king of Babylon, thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be burnt with fire, and thou shalt be safe, thou and thine house.
JER 38:18 Forsooth if thou goest not out to the princes of the king of Babylon, this city shall be betaken into the hands of Chaldees; and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape from the hand of them.
JER 38:19 And king Zedekiah said to Jeremy, I am anguished for the Jews that fled over to [[the]] Chaldees, lest peradventure I be betaken into the hands of them, and they scorn me.
JER 38:20 Forsooth Jeremy answered, and said to him, They shall not betake thee; I beseech, hear thou the voice of the Lord, which I shall speak to thee, and it shall be well to thee, and thy soul shall live.
JER 38:21 That if thou wilt not go out, this is the word which the Lord showed to me,
JER 38:22 Lo! all the women, that were left in the house of the king of Judah, shall be led out to the princes of the king of Babylon; and those women shall say, Thy peaceable men deceived thee, and had the mastery against thee; they drowned thee [[down]] in [[the]] filth, and thy feet in sliderness, and [[they]] went away from thee.
JER 38:23 And all thy wives and thy sons shall be led out to [[the]] Chaldees, and thou shalt not escape the hands of them; but thou shalt be betaken into the hands of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn this city with fire.
JER 38:24 Therefore Zedekiah said to Jeremy, No man know these words, and thou shalt not die.
JER 38:25 Soothly if the princes hear, that I spake with thee, and they come to thee, and say to thee, Show thou to us what thou spakest with the king, hide thou not from us, and we shall not slay thee; and what the king spake with thee,
JER 38:26 thou shalt say to them, Kneelingly I setted forth my prayers before the king, that he should not command me to be led again into the house of Jonathan, and I should die there.
JER 38:27 Therefore all the princes came to Jeremy, and asked him, and he spake to them by all the words which the king had commanded to him, and they ceased from him; for why nothing was heard.
JER 38:28 Therefore Jeremy dwelled in the porch of the prison, till to the day in which Jerusalem was taken; and it was done, that Jerusalem should be taken.
JER 39:1 In the ninth year of Zedekiah, king of Judah, in the tenth month, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and all his host, came to Jerusalem, and they besieged it.
JER 39:2 Forsooth in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, the city was opened;
JER 39:3 and all the princes of the king of Babylon entered, and sat in the middle gate, Nergalsharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, and all [[the]] other princes of the king of Babylon.
JER 39:4 And when Zedekiah, the king of Judah, and all the men warriors had seen them, they fled, and went out by night from the city, by the way of the garden of the king, and by the gate that was betwixt two walls; and they went out to the way of desert.
JER 39:5 Forsooth the host of Chaldees pursued them, and they took Zedekiah in the field of wilderness of Jericho; and they took him, and brought to Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, in Riblah, which is in the land of Hamath; and Nebuchadnezzar spake dooms to him.
JER 39:6 And the king of Babylon killed the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah, before his eyes; and the king of Babylon killed all the noble men of Judah.
JER 39:7 Also he putted out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in fetters, that he should be led into Babylon.
JER 39:8 And [[the]] Chaldees burnt with fire the house of the king, and the houses of the common people, and destroyed the wall of Jerusalem.
JER 39:9 And Nebuzaradan, the master of knights, translated into Babylon the residues of the people, that dwelled in the city, and the fleers-away, that had fled over to him, and the super-fluous men of the common people, that were left.
JER 39:10 And Nebuzaradan, the master of knights, left in the land of Judah, of the people of poor men, and gave to them vineries [[or vineyards]] and cisterns in that day.
JER 39:11 Forsooth Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, had commanded of Jeremy to Nebuzaradan, master of the chivalry, and said,
JER 39:12 Take thou him, and set thine eyes on him, and do thou nothing of evil to him; but as he will, so do thou to him.
JER 39:13 Therefore Nebuzaradan, the prince of [[the]] chivalry, sent Nebushazban, and Rabsaris, and Nergalsharezer, and Rabmag, and all the principal men of the king of Babylon,
JER 39:14 sent, and took Jeremy from the porch of the prison, and they betook him to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, that he should enter into the house, and dwell among the people.
JER 39:15 Forsooth the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy, when he was enclosed in the porch of the prison, and said,
JER 39:16 Go thou, and say to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, and speak thou, The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Lo! I shall bring my words on this city into evil, and not into good; and those [[or they]] shall be in thy sight in that day.
JER 39:17 And I shall deliver thee in that day, saith the Lord, and thou shalt not be betaken into the hands of [[the]] men, which thou dreadest;
JER 39:18 but I delivering shall deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall down by sword; but thy soul shall be into health to thee, for thou haddest trust in me, saith the Lord.
JER 40:1 The word that was made of the Lord to Jeremy, after that he was delivered of Nebuzaradan, master of the chivalry, from Ramah, when he took him bound with chains, in the midst of all men that passed from Jerusalem, and from Judah, and were led into Babylon.
JER 40:2 Therefore the prince of the chivalry took Jeremy, and said to him, Thy Lord God spake this evil on this place,
JER 40:3 and the Lord hath brought, and hath done, as he spake; for ye sinned to the Lord, and heard not the voice of him, and this word is done to you.
JER 40:4 Now therefore lo! I have released thee today from the chains that be in thine hands; if it pleaseth thee to come with me into Babylon, come thou, and I shall set mine eyes on thee; soothly if it displeaseth thee to come with me into Babylon, sit thou here; lo! all the land is in thy sight, that that thou choosest, and whither it pleaseth thee to go, thither go thou,
JER 40:5 and do not thou come with me. But dwell thou with Gedaliah, son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon made sovereign to the cities of Judah; therefore dwell thou with him in the midst of the people, either go thou, whither ever it pleaseth thee to go. And the master of [[the]] chivalry gave to him meats, and gifts, and let him go.
JER 40:6 Forsooth Jeremy came to Gedaliah, son of Ahikam, in Mizpah, and dwelled with him, in the midst of the people that was left in the land.
JER 40:7 And when all princes of the host had heard, that were scattered by countries, they and the fellows of them, that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah sovereign of the land, the son of Ahikam, and that he had betaken to Gedaliah men, and women, and little children, and of [[the]] poor men of the land, that were not translated into Babylon,
JER 40:8 they came to Gedaliah, in Mizpah; and Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and Jonathan, and Seraiah, the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai, that were of the Netophathites, and Jezaniah, the son of Maachathite; both they and their men came to Gedaliah.
JER 40:9 And Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, swore to them, and to the fellows of them, and said, Do not ye dread to serve [[the]] Chaldees; but dwell ye in the land, and serve ye the king of Babylon, and it shall be well to you.
JER 40:10 Lo! I dwell in Mizpah, for to answer to the commandment of [[the]] Chaldees, that be sent to us; forsooth gather ye vintage, and ripe corn, and oil, and keep ye in your vessels, and dwell ye in your cities which ye hold.
JER 40:11 But also all the Jews, that were in Moab, and in the hosts of Ammon, and in Idumea, and in all the countries, when it is heard, that the king of Babylon had given residues, either remnants, in Judah, and that he had made sovereign on them Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan,
JER 40:12 soothly all [[the]] Jews turned again from all [[the]] places, to which they had fled; and they came into the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, in Mizpah, and gathered wine and ripe corn full much.
JER 40:13 Forsooth Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the princes of the host, that were scattered in the countries, came to Gedaliah in Mizpah,
JER 40:14 and said to him, Know thou, that Baalis, king of the sons of Ammon, hath sent Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, to smite thy life. And Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, believed not to them.
JER 40:15 Forsooth Johanan, the son of Kareah, said to Gedaliah asides half in Mizpah, and spake, I shall go, and slay Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, while no man knoweth, lest he slay thy life, and all the Jews be scattered, that be gathered to thee, and the remnants of Judah shall perish.
JER 40:16 And Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, said to Johanan, the son of Kareah, Do not thou do this word, for thou speakest false of Ishmael.
JER 41:1 And it was done in the seventh month, Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, son of Elishama, of the king’s seed, and the principal men of the king, and ten men with him, came to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, in Mizpah; and they ate there loaves together in Mizpah.
JER 41:2 Forsooth Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that were with him, rose up, and killed with sword Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan; and they killed him, whom the king of Babylon had made sovereign of the land.
JER 41:3 Also Ishmael killed all the Jews, that were with Gedaliah in Mizpah, and the Chaldees, that were found there, and the men warriors.
JER 41:4 Forsooth in the second day, after that he had slain Gedaliah, while no man knew yet,
JER 41:5 fourscore men with shaven beards, and rent clothes, and pale men, came from Shechem, and from Shiloh, and from Samaria; and they had gifts and incense in the hand, for to offer in the house of the Lord.
JER 41:6 Therefore Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, went out of Mizpah into the meeting of them; and he went going and weeping. Soothly when he had met them, he said to them, Come ye to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam;
JER 41:7 and when they were come to the midst of the city, Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, killed them about the midst of the pit, he and the men that were with him.
JER 41:8 But ten men were found among them, that said to Ishmael, Do not thou slay us, for we have treasures of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey, in the field. And he ceased, and killed not them with their brethren.
JER 41:9 Forsooth the pit into which Ishmael casted forth all the carrions of [[the]] men, which he killed for Gedaliah, is that pit, which king Asa made for Baasha, the king of Israel; Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, filled that pit with slain men.
JER 41:10 And Ishmael led prisoners all the remnants of the people, that were in Mizpah, the daughters of the king, and all the people that dwelled in Mizpah, which Nebuzaradan, the prince of [[the]] chivalry, had betaken to keeping to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam. And Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, took them, and went to pass over to the sons of Ammon.
JER 41:11 Forsooth Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the princes of warriors, that were with him, heard all the evil, which Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, had done.
JER 41:12 And when they had taken all [[the]] men, they went forth to fight against Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah; and they found him at the many waters, that be in Gibeon.
JER 41:13 And when all the people, that was with Ishmael, had seen Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the princes of warriors, that were with him, they were glad.
JER 41:14 And all the people, whom Ishmael had taken in Mizpah, turned again; and it turned again, and went to Johanan, the son of Kareah.
JER 41:15 Forsooth Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, fled with eight men from the face of Johanan, and went to the sons of Ammon.
JER 41:16 Therefore Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the princes of warriors, that were with him, took all the remnants of the common people, which they brought again from Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, that were of Mizpah, after that he killed Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam; he took strong men to battle, and women, and children, and geldings, which he had brought again from Gibeon.
JER 41:17 And they went, and sat being pilgrims in Chimham, which is beside Bethlehem, that they should go, and enter into Egypt, from the face of Chaldees;
JER 41:18 for they dreaded those Chaldees, for Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, had slain Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, whom the king Nebuchadnezzar had made sovereign in the land of Judah.
JER 42:1 And all the princes of warriors nighed, and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah, the son of Hoshaiah, and the residue common people, from a little man unto a great man.
JER 42:2 And they said to Jeremy, the prophet, Our prayer fall in thy sight, and pray thou for us to thy Lord God, for all these remnants; for we be left a few of many, as thine eyes behold us;
JER 42:3 and thy Lord God tell to us the way, by which we shall go, and the word which we shall do.
JER 42:4 Forsooth Jeremy, the prophet, said to them, I have heard; lo! I pray to our Lord God, by your words; I shall show to you each word, whatever word the Lord shall answer to me, neither I shall hide anything from you.
JER 42:5 And they said to Jeremy, The Lord be witness of truth and of faith betwixt us; if not by each word, in which thy Lord God shall send thee to us, so we shall do,
JER 42:6 whether it be good either evil. We shall obey to the voice of our Lord God, to whom we send thee, that it be well to us, when we have heard the voice of our Lord God.
JER 42:7 Forsooth when ten days were [[ful]] filled, the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy.
JER 42:8 And he called Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the princes of warriors, that were with him, and all the people from the least unto the most;
JER 42:9 and he said to them, The Lord God of Israel saith these things, to whom ye sent me, that I should meekly set forth your prayers in his sight.
JER 42:10 If ye rest, and dwell in this land, I shall build you, and I shall not destroy; I shall plant, and I shall not draw out; for now I am pleased on the evil which I did to you.
JER 42:11 Do not ye dread of the face of the king of Babylon, whom ye that be fearful, dread; do not ye dread him, saith the Lord, for I am with you, to make you safe, and to deliver [[you]] from his hand.
JER 42:12 And I shall give mercies to you, and I shall have mercy on you, and I shall make you dwell in your land.
JER 42:13 Forsooth if ye say, We shall not dwell in this land, neither we shall hear the voice of our Lord God,
JER 42:14 and say, Nay, but we shall go to the land of Egypt, where we shall not see battle, and shall not hear the noise, either sound, of trump, and we shall not suffer hunger, and there we shall dwell;
JER 42:15 for this thing, ye remnants of Judah, hear now the word of the Lord. The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, If ye set your face, for to enter into Egypt, and if ye enter, to dwell there,
JER 42:16 the sword which ye dread shall take you there in the land of Egypt, and the hunger for which ye be anguished shall cleave to you in Egypt; and there ye shall die.
JER 42:17 And all the men that setted their face, to enter into Egypt, and to dwell there, shall die by sword, and hunger, and pestilence; no man of them shall dwell still, neither shall escape from the face of [[the]] evil, which I shall bring on them.
JER 42:18 For why the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, As my strong vengeance and mine indignation is welled together on the dwellers of Jerusalem, so mine indignation shall be welled together on you, when ye have entered into Egypt; and ye shall be into swearing, and into wondering, and into cursing, and into shame; and ye shall no more see this place.
JER 42:19 The word of the Lord is on you, ye remnants of Judah; do not ye enter into Egypt; ye witting shall know, that I have witnessed to you today;
JER 42:20 for ye have deceived your souls, for ye sent me to your Lord God, and said, Pray thou for us to our Lord God, and by all things whatever things our Lord [[God]] shall say to thee, so tell thou to us, and we shall do.
JER 42:21 And I told to you today, and ye heard not the voice of your Lord God, on all things for which he sent me to you.
JER 42:22 Now therefore, ye witting shall know, for ye shall die by sword, and hunger, and pestilence, in the place to which ye would enter, to dwell there.
JER 43:1 Forsooth it was done, when Jeremy, speaking to the people, had [[ful]] filled all the words of the Lord God of them, for which the Lord God of them sent him to them, all these words,
JER 43:2 Azariah, the son of Hoshaiah, said, and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all proud men, saying to Jeremy, Thou speakest leasing; our Lord God sent not thee, and said, Enter ye not into Egypt, to dwell there;
JER 43:3 but Baruch, the son of Neriah, stirreth thee against us, that he betake us in the hands of Chaldees, that he slay us, and make to be led over into Babylon.
JER 43:4 And Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the princes of warriors, and all the people, heard not the voice of the Lord, that they dwell in the land of Judah.
JER 43:5 But Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the princes of warriors, took all of the remnants of Judah, that turned again from all folks, to which they were scattered before, that they should dwell in the land of Judah;
JER 43:6 they took men, and women, and little children, and the daughters of the king, and each person, whom Nebuzaradan, the prince of [[the]] chivalry, had left with Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan. And they took Jeremy, the prophet, and Baruch, the son of Neriah,
JER 43:7 and they entered into the land of Egypt; for they obeyed not to the voice of the Lord, and they came unto Tahpanhes.
JER 43:8 And the word of the Lord was made to Jeremy in Tahpanhes, and said,
JER 43:9 Take in thine hand great stones, and hide thou those in a den [[or hide them in the cave]], which is under the wall of tilestone, in the gate of the house of Pharaoh, in Tahpanhes, while all the Jews see it.
JER 43:10 And thou shalt say to them, The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Lo! I shall send, and I shall take Nebuchadnezzar, my servant, the king of Babylon; and I shall set his throne on these stones, which I [[have]] hid; and he shall set his seat on those stones.
JER 43:11 And he shall come, and smite the land of Egypt, which in death into death, and which in captivity into captivity, and which in sword into sword.
JER 43:12 And he shall kindle fire in the temples of [[the]] gods of Egypt, and he shall burn those temples, and shall lead them prisoners; and the land of Egypt shall be wrapped, as a shepherd is wrapped in his mantle; and he shall go out from thence in peace.
JER 43:13 And he shall all-break the images of the house of the sun, that be in the land of Egypt; and he shall burn in fire the temples of the gods of Egypt.
JER 44:1 The word that was made to Jeremy, and to all the Jews, that dwelled in the land of Egypt, dwelling in Migdol, and in Tahpanhes, and in Memphis, and in the land of Pathros, and said,
JER 44:2 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Ye saw all this evil, which I brought on Jerusalem, and on all the cities of Judah; and lo! those [[or they]] be forsaken today, and no dweller is in them;
JER 44:3 for the malice which they did, to stir me to wrathfulness [[or to wrath]], and that they went, and made sacrifice, and worshipped alien gods, which they knew not, both ye, and they, and your fathers.
JER 44:4 And I sent to you all my servants prophets; and I rose by night, and sent, and said, Do not ye do the word of such abomination.
JER 44:5 And they heard not, neither bowed down their ear, that they shall be converted from their evils, and should not make sacrifice to alien gods.
JER 44:6 And mine indignation and my strong vengeance is welled together, and is kindled in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they be turned into wilderness, and wasteness, by this day.
JER 44:7 And now the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Why do ye this great evil against your souls, that a man of you perish and a woman, a little child and a sucking infant, from the midst of Judah, neither any residue thing be left in you,
JER 44:8 that stir me to wrath by the works of your hands, in making sacrifice to alien gods in the land of Egypt, into which ye entered, that ye dwell there, and that ye perish, and be into cursing, and into shame to all the folks of earth?
JER 44:9 Whether ye have forgotten the evils of your fathers, and the evils of the kings of Judah, and the evils of their wives, and your evils, and the evils of your wives, which they did in the land of Judah, and in the countries of Jerusalem?
JER 44:10 They be not cleansed unto this day, and they dreaded not, and they went not in the law of the Lord, and in my behests, which I gave before you, and before your fathers.
JER 44:11 Therefore the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Lo! I shall set my face in you into evil, and I shall lose all Judah,
JER 44:12 and I shall take the remnants of Judah, that setted their faces, to go into the land of Egypt, and to dwell there; and all shall be wasted in the land of Egypt, they shall fall down by sword, and shall be wasted in hunger, from the least unto the most, they shall die by sword and hunger, and shall be into swearing, and into miracle, or wonder, and into cursing, and into shame.
JER 44:13 And I shall visit on the dwellers of Egypt, as I visited on Jerusalem, in sword, and in hunger, and in pestilence.
JER 44:14 And none shall be, that shall escape, and be [[the]] residue of the remnants of Jews, that go to be pilgrims in the land of Egypt, and to turn again to the land of Judah, to which they raise [[up]] their souls, that they turn again, and dwell there; they shall not turn again thither, no but they that fled.
JER 44:15 Forsooth all men answered to Jeremy, and knew, that their wives made sacrifice to alien gods, and all [[the]] women, of which a great multitude stood, and all the people of dwellers in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, and said,
JER 44:16 We shall not hear of thee the word which thou speakest to us in the name of our Lord God,
JER 44:17 but we doing shall do each word that shall go out of our mouth, that we make sacrifice to the queen of heaven, and that we offer to it moist sacrifices, as we did, and our fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem; and we were [[full-]]filled with loaves, and it was well to us, and we saw none evil.
JER 44:18 But from that time, in which we ceased to make sacrifice to the queen of heaven, and to offer to it moist sacrifices, we had need to all things, and we were wasted by sword and hunger.
JER 44:19 That if we make sacrifice to the queen of heaven, and offer to it moist sacrifices, whether without our hus-bands we made to it cakes, to worship it, and loaves to be offered?
JER 44:20 And Jeremy said to all the people, against the men, and against the women, and against all the people, that answered to him the word, and he said,
JER 44:21 Whether not the sacrifices which ye sacrificed in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your princes, and the people of the land, stirred God to vengeance? The Lord had mind on these things, and it ascended [[or went up]] on his heart;
JER 44:22 and the Lord might no more bear, for the malice of your studies, and for the abominations which ye did. And your land is made into desolation, and into wondering, and into curse, for no dweller is, as this day is.
JER 44:23 Therefore for ye made sacrifice to idols, and sinned to the Lord, and heard not the voice of the Lord, and went not in the law, and in the commandments, and in the witnesses of him, therefore these evils befell to you, as this day is.
JER 44:24 Forsooth Jeremy said to all the people, and to all the women, All Judah, that be in the land of Egypt, hear ye the word of the Lord.
JER 44:25 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, and speaketh, Ye and your wives spake with your mouths, and [[ful]] filled with your hands, and said, Make we our vows which we vowed, that we make sacrifice to the queen of heaven, and offer to it moist sacrifices; ye [[ful]] filled your vows, and did those [[or them]] in work.
JER 44:26 Therefore, all Judah, that dwell in the land of Egypt, hear ye the word of the Lord; Lo! I swore in my great name, saith the Lord, that my name shall no more be called by the mouth of each man Jew, saying, The Lord God liveth, in all the land of Egypt.
JER 44:27 Lo! I shall wake on them into evil, and not into good; and all the men of Judah, that be in the land of Egypt, shall be wasted, by sword and hunger, till they be wasted utterly.
JER 44:28 And a few men that fled the sword, shall turn again from the land of Egypt into the land of Judah; and all the remnants of Judah, of them that enter into the land of Egypt, to dwell there, shall know, whose word shall be [[ful]] filled, mine either theirs.
JER 44:29 And this shall be a sign to you, saith the Lord, that I shall visit on you in this place, that ye know, that verily my words shall be [[ful]] filled against you into evil.
JER 44:30 The Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall betake Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his life, as I betook Zedekiah, king of Judah, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, his enemy, and seeking his life.
JER 45:1 The word that Jeremy, the prophet, spake to Baruch, the son of Neriah, when he had written these words in the book, of the mouth of Jeremy, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, and said,
JER 45:2 The Lord God of Israel saith these things to thee, Baruch.
JER 45:3 Thou saidest, Woe to me wretch, for the Lord increased sorrow to my sorrow; I travailed in my wailing, and I found not rest.
JER 45:4 The Lord saith these things, Thus thou shalt say to him, Lo! I destroy them, which I builded, and I draw out them, which I planted, and all this land.
JER 45:5 And seekest thou great things to thee? do not thou seek, for lo! I shall bring evil on each man, saith the Lord, and I shall give to thee thy life into health, in all places, to which ever places thou shalt go.
JER 46:1 The word of the Lord, that was made to Jeremy, the prophet, against heathen men;
JER 46:2 to Egypt, against the host of Pharaohnecho, king of Egypt, that was beside the flood Euphrates, in Carche-mish, whom Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, smote, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah.
JER 46:3 Make ye ready shield and target, and go ye forth to battle.
JER 46:4 Join ye horses, and ascend [[or go up]], ye knights; stand ye in helmets, polish ye spears, clothe ye you in habergeons.
JER 46:5 What therefore? I saw them dreadful, either afeared, and turning the backs, the strong men of them slain; and they fled swiftly, and beheld not; dread was on each side, saith the Lord.
JER 46:6 A swift man shall not flee, and a strong man guess not himself to be saved; at the north, beside the flood Euphrates, they were overcome, and fell down.
JER 46:7 Who is this, that ascendeth [[or goeth up]] as a flood, and his swells waxed great as of floods?
JER 46:8 Egypt ascended [[or goeth up]] at the likeness of a flood, and his waves shall be moved as [[the]] floods; and it shall say, I shall ascend, and cover the earth; I shall lose the city, and dwellers thereof.
JER 46:9 Ascend ye [[or Goeth]] upon horses, and make ye full out joy in chariots; and strong men, come forth, Ethiopia and Libya, holding shield, and Lydia, taking and shooting arrows.
JER 46:10 Forsooth that day of the Lord God of hosts is a day of vengeance, that he take vengeance of his enemies; the sword shall devour, and shall be [[full-]]filled, and shall greatly be filled with the blood of them; for why the slain sacrifice of the Lord of hosts is in the land of the north, beside the flood Euphrates.
JER 46:11 Thou virgin, the daughter of Egypt, go up into Gilead, and take medicine. In vain thou shalt multiply medicines; health shall not be to thee.
JER 46:12 Heathen men heard thy shame, and thy yelling filled the earth; for a strong man hurtled against a strong man, and both fell down together.
JER 46:13 The word which the Lord spake to Jeremy, the prophet, on that that Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, was to coming, and to smiting the land of Egypt.
JER 46:14 Tell ye to Egypt, and make ye heard in Migdol, and sound it in Memphis, and say ye in Tahpanhes, Stand thou, and make thee ready, for a sword shall devour those things that be by thy compass.
JER 46:15 Why hath thy strong man waxed rotten? He stood not, for the Lord underturned him.
JER 46:16 He multiplied fallers, and a man fell down to his neighbour; and they shall say, Rise ye, and turn we again to our people, and to the land of our birth, from the face of sword of the culver.
JER 46:17 Call ye the name of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, The time hath brought noise.
JER 46:18 I live, saith the king, the Lord of hosts is his name; for it shall come as Tabor in hills, and as Carmel in the sea.
JER 46:19 Thou dwelleress, the daughter of Egypt, make to thee vessels of passing over; for why Memphis shall be into wilderness, and it shall be forsaken [[and]] unhabitable.
JER 46:20 Egypt is a shapely cow calf, and fair; a pricker from the north shall come to it.
JER 46:21 Also the hired men thereof, that lived as calves made fat in the midst thereof, be turned, and fled together, and might not stand; for the day of slaying of them shall come [[up]] on them, the time of the visiting of them.
JER 46:22 The voice of them shall sound as of brass, for they shall hasten with host, and with axes they shall come to it. As men cutting down trees,
JER 46:23 they cutted down the forest thereof, saith the Lord, which may not be numbered; they be multiplied over locusts, and no number is in them.
JER 46:24 The daughter of Egypt is shamed, and betaken into the hand of the people of the north,
JER 46:25 said the Lord of hosts, God of Israel. Lo! I shall visit on the noise of Alexandria, and on Pharaoh, and on Egypt, and on the gods thereof, and on the kings thereof, and on them that trust in him.
JER 46:26 And I shall give them into the hands of men that seek the life of them, and into the hands of Nebu-chadnezzar, king of Babylon, and into the hands of his servants; and after these things it shall be inhabited, as in the former days, saith the Lord.
JER 46:27 And thou, Jacob, my servant, dread thou not, and Israel, dread thou not; for lo! I shall make thee safe from a far place, and thy seed from the land of his captivity; and Jacob shall turn again, and shall rest, and shall have prosperity, and none shall be, that shall make him afeared.
JER 46:28 And Jacob, my servant, do not thou dread, saith the Lord, for I am with thee; for I shall waste all folks, to which I casted thee out; but I shall not waste thee, but I shall chastise thee in doom, and I shall not spare thee as innocent.
JER 47:1 The word of the Lord, that was made to Jeremy, the prophet, against Palestines, before that Pharaoh smote Gaza.
JER 47:2 The Lord saith these things, Lo! waters shall ascend [[or go up]] from the north, and they shall be as a strand [[or stream]] overflowing, and they shall cover the land, and the fullness thereof, the city, and the dwellers thereof. Men shall cry, and all the dwellers of the land shall yell,
JER 47:3 for the noise of boast of armed men, and of warriors of him, and for moving of his carts, and multitude of his wheels. Fathers beheld not sons with benumbed hands,
JER 47:4 for the coming of the day in which all Philistines shall be destroyed; and Tyrus shall be destroyed, and Sidon with all their other helps. For the Lord hath destroyed Palestines, the remnants of the isle of Cappadocia.
JER 47:5 Baldness came on Gaza; Ashkelon was still, and the remnants of the valley of them. How long shalt thou fall down,
JER 47:6 O! sword of the Lord, how long shalt thou not rest? Enter thou into thy sheath, be thou refreshed, and be still.
JER 47:7 How shall it rest, when the Lord commanded to it against Ashkelon, and against the sea coasts thereof, and there [[he]] hath said to it?
JER 48:1 To Moab, the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things. Woe on Nebo, for it is destroyed, and shamed; Kiriathaim is taken, the strong city is shamed, and trembled.
JER 48:2 And full out joying is no more in Moab; they thought evil against Hesh-bon. Come ye, and lose we it from [[the]] folk. Therefore thou being still, [[thou]] shalt be stilled, and sword shall follow thee.
JER 48:3 A voice of cry from Horonaim, destroying, and great sorrow.
JER 48:4 Moab is defouled, tell ye [[out the]] cry to little children thereof.
JER 48:5 For a man weeping, ascended [[or went up]] with weeping, by the ascending [[or going up]] of Luhith; for in the coming down of Horonaim, [[the]] enemies heard the yelling of sorrow.
JER 48:6 Flee ye, save ye your lives; and ye shall be as brooms in desert.
JER 48:7 For that that thou haddest trust in thy strongholds, and in thy treasures, also thou shalt be taken. And Chemosh shall go into passing over, the priests thereof and the princes thereof together.
JER 48:8 And a robber shall come to each city, and no city shall be saved; and valleys shall perish, and field places shall be destroyed, for the Lord said.
JER 48:9 Give ye the flower of Moab, for it shall go out flowering; and the cities thereof shall be forsaken, and unhabitable.
JER 48:10 He is cursed, that doeth the work of God guilefully; and he is cursed, that forbiddeth his sword from blood.
JER 48:11 Moab was plenteous from his young waxing age, and rested in his dregs, neither was shed [[or poured]] out from vessel into vessel, and went not into passing over; therefore his taste dwelled in him, and his odour is not changed.
JER 48:12 Therefore lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall send to it ordainers, and arrayers of pottles; and they shall array it, and they shall waste the vessels thereof, and hurtle together the pottles of them.
JER 48:13 And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel, in which it had trust.
JER 48:14 How say ye, We be strong, and stalworthy men to fight?
JER 48:15 Moab is destroyed, and they have burnt the cities thereof, and the chosen young men thereof went down into slaying, saith the king, the Lord of hosts is his name.
JER 48:16 The perishing of Moab is nigh, that it come, and the evil thereof runneth full swiftly.
JER 48:17 All ye that be in the compass thereof, comfort it; and all ye that know the name thereof, say, How is the strong rod broken, the glorious staff?
JER 48:18 Thou dwelling of the daughter of Dibon, go down from glory, sit thou in thirst; for the destroyer of Moab shall ascend [[or go up]] to thee, and he shall destroy thy strongholds.
JER 48:19 Thou dwelling of Aroer, stand in the way, and behold; ask thou him that fleeth, and him that escaped; say thou, What befell?
JER 48:20 Moab is shamed, for he is over-come; yell ye, and cry; tell ye in Arnon, that Moab is destroyed.
JER 48:21 And doom is come to the land of the field, on Holon, and on Jahazah, and on Mephaath,
JER 48:22 and on Dibon, and on Nebo, and on the house of Diblathaim,
JER 48:23 and on Kiriathaim, and on Beth-gamul, and on Bethmeon,
JER 48:24 and on Kerioth, and on Bozrah, and on all the cities of the land of Moab, that be far, and that be nigh.
JER 48:25 The horn of Moab is cut away, and the arm thereof is all-broken, saith the Lord.
JER 48:26 Fill ye him greatly, for he is raised against the Lord; and he shall hurtle down the hand of Moab in his spewing, and he also shall be into scorn.
JER 48:27 For why, Israel, he was into scorn to thee, as if thou haddest found him among thieves; therefore for thy words which thou spakest against him, thou shalt be led prisoner.
JER 48:28 Ye dwellers of Moab, forsake cities, and dwell in the stone, and be ye as a culver making nest in the highest mouth of an hole.
JER 48:29 We have heard the pride of Moab; he is full proud. I know, saith the Lord, the highness thereof, and pride in word, and pride in bearing, and the highness of heart,
JER 48:30 and the boast thereof, and that the virtue thereof is not nigh, either like it, neither it enforced or endeavoured to do after that that it might.
JER 48:31 Therefore I shall wail on Moab, and I shall cry to all Moab, to the men of the earthen wall, that wail.
JER 48:32 Of the wailing of Jazer I shall weep to thee, thou vine of Sibmah; thy scions passed the sea, those [[or they]] came unto the sea of Jazer; a robber fell in on thy ripe corn, and on thy vintage.
JER 48:33 Full out joy and gladness is taken away from Carmel, and from the land of Moab, and I have taken away wine from [[the]] pressers [[or wine presses]]; a stamper of [[the]] grape shall not sing a customable merry song.
JER 48:34 Of the cry of Heshbon unto Elealeh and Jahaz they gave their voice, from Zoar unto Horonaim a cow calf of three years; forsooth the waters of Nimrim shall be full evil.
JER 48:35 And I shall take away from Moab, saith the Lord, him that offereth in high places, and him that maketh sacrifice to the gods thereof.
JER 48:36 Therefore mine heart shall sound as a pipe of brass to Moab, and mine heart shall give sound of pipes to the men of the earthen wall; for it did more than it might, therefore they perished.
JER 48:37 For why each head shall be bald-ness, and each beard shall be shaved; in all hands shall be binding together, and an hair-shirt shall be on each back.
JER 48:38 And all wailing shall be on all the roofs of Moab, and in the streets thereof, for I have all-broken Moab as an unprofitable vessel, saith the Lord.
JER 48:39 How is it overcome, and they yelled? how hath Moab cast down the noll, and is shamed? And Moab shall be into scorn, and into ensample to all men in his compass.
JER 48:40 The Lord saith these things, Lo! as an eagle he shall fly out, and he shall stretch forth his wings to Moab.
JER 48:41 Kerioth is taken, and strongholds be taken; and the heart of strong men of Moab shall be in that day, as the heart of a woman travailing of child.
JER 48:42 And Moab shall cease to be a people, for it had glory against the Lord.
JER 48:43 Dread, and ditch, and snare is on thee, thou dweller of Moab, saith the Lord.
JER 48:44 He that fleeth from the face of dread, shall fall into a ditch; and they that ascend [[or go up]] from the ditch, shall be taken with a snare. For I shall bring on Moab the year of the visitation of them, saith the Lord.
JER 48:45 Men fleeing from the snare stood in the shadow of Heshbon, for why fire went out of Heshbon, and flame from the midst of Sihon; and [[it]] devoured a part of Moab, and the top of the sons of noise.
JER 48:46 Moab, woe to thee; thou people of Chemosh, hast perished, for why thy sons and thy daughters be taken into captivity.
JER 48:47 And I shall turn the captivity of Moab in the last days, saith the Lord. Hitherto be the dooms of Moab.
JER 49:1 To the sons also of Ammon. The Lord saith these things. Whether no sons be of Israel, either an heir is not to it? why therefore wielded Malcham the heritage of Gad, and the people thereof dwelled in the cities of Gad?
JER 49:2 Lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall make the gnashing of battle heard on Rabbah of the sons of Ammon; and it shall be destroyed into noise, and the villages thereof shall be burnt with fire, and Israel shall wield his wielders, saith the Lord.
JER 49:3 Yell, ye Heshbon, for Ai is destroyed; cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird you with hair-shirts, wail ye, and compass by hedges; for why Malcham shall be led into passing over, the priests thereof and princes thereof together.
JER 49:4 What hast thou glory in valleys? Thy valleys floated away [[or flowed down]], thou delicate daughter, that haddest trust in thy treasures, and saidest, Who shall come to me?
JER 49:5 Lo! I shall bring in dread on thee, saith the Lord God of hosts, God of Israel, of all men that be in thy compass; and ye shall be scattered, each by himself, from your sight, and none shall be, that gather them that flee.
JER 49:6 And after these things I shall make the fleers and [[the]] prisoners of the sons of Ammon to turn again, saith the Lord.
JER 49:7 To Idumea, the Lord of hosts saith these things. Whether wisdom is no more in Teman? Counsel perished from sons, the wisdom of them is made unprofitable.
JER 49:8 Flee ye, and turn ye the backs; go down into a swallow, ye dwellers of Dedan, for I have brought the perdition of Esau on him, the time of his visitation.
JER 49:9 If gatherers of grapes had come [[up]] on thee, they should have left a cluster; if thieves in the night, they should have ravished that that sufficed to them.
JER 49:10 Forsooth I have uncovered Esau, and I have showed the hid things of him, and he may not be able to be hid; his seed is destroyed, and his brethren, and his neighbours, and it shall not be.
JER 49:11 Forsake thy fatherless children, and I shall make them to live, and thy widows shall hope in me.
JER 49:12 For the Lord saith these things, Lo! they drinking shall drink, to whom was no doom, that they should drink the cup. And shalt thou be left as innocent? thou shalt not be innocent, but thou drinking shalt drink.
JER 49:13 For I swore by myself, saith the Lord, that Bozrah shall be into wilderness, and into shame, and into forsaking, and into cursing; and all the cities thereof shall be into everlasting wildernesses.
JER 49:14 I heard an hearing of the Lord, and I am sent a messenger to heathen men; Be ye gathered together, and come ye against them, and rise we together into battle.
JER 49:15 For lo! I have given thee a little one among heathen men, despisable among men.
JER 49:16 Thy boast, and the pride of thine heart, hath deceived thee, that dwellest in the caves of stone, and enforcest or endeavourest to take the highness of a little hill; when thou as an eagle hast raised thy nest, from thence I shall draw thee down, saith the Lord.
JER 49:17 And Idumea shall be forsaken; each man that shall pass by it, shall wonder, and shall hiss on all the wounds thereof;
JER 49:18 as Sodom and Gomorrah is destroyed, and the nigh cities thereof, saith the Lord. A man shall not dwell there, and the son of man shall not inhabit it.
JER 49:19 Lo! as a lion he shall ascend [[or go up]] from the pride of Jordan to the strong fairness; for I shall make him run suddenly to it; and who shall be the chosen man whom I shall set [[or put]] before him? For who is like to me, and who shall suffer me? and who is this shepherd, that shall against-stand my cheer?
JER 49:20 Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord, which he took to Edom, and his thoughts, which he thought of the dwellers of Teman. If the little of the flock cast not them down, if they destroy not with them the dwelling of them, else no man give credence to me.
JER 49:21 The earth was moved of the voice of [[the]] falling of them; the cry of voice thereof was heard in the Red Sea.
JER 49:22 Lo! as an eagle he shall ascend [[or go up]], and fly out, and he shall spread abroad his wings on Bozrah; and the heart of the strong men of Idumea shall be in that day, as the heart of a woman travailing of child.
JER 49:23 To Damascus. Hamath is shamed, and Arpad, for they heard a full wicked hearing; they were troubled in the sea, for anguish they might not have rest.
JER 49:24 Damascus was discomforted, it was turned into flight; trembling took it, anguishes and sorrows held it, as a woman travailing of child.
JER 49:25 How forsook they a praiseable city, the city of gladness?
JER 49:26 Therefore the young men thereof shall fall in the streets thereof, and all men of battle shall be stilled in that day, saith the Lord of hosts.
JER 49:27 And I shall kindle fire in the wall of Damascus, and it shall devour the buildings of Benhadad.
JER 49:28 To Kedar, and to the realm[[s]] of Hazor, which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, smote, the Lord saith these things. Rise ye, and ascend [[or goeth up]] to Kedar, and destroy ye the sons of the east.
JER 49:29 They shall take the tabernacles of them, and the flocks of them; they shall take to them the skins of them, and all the vessels of them, and the camels of them; and they shall call on them inward dread in compass.
JER 49:30 Flee ye, go ye away greatly, ye that dwell in Hazor, sit in swallows, saith the Lord. For why Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, hath taken counsel against you, and he thought thoughts against you.
JER 49:31 Rise ye together, and ascend ye [[or goeth up]] to a peaceable folk, and dwelling trustily, saith the Lord; not doors nor bars be to it, and they dwell alone.
JER 49:32 And the camels of them shall be into ravishing, and the multitude of their beasts into prey; and I shall scatter them into each wind, that be beclipped on the long hair, and by each coast of them I shall bring perishing on them, saith the Lord.
JER 49:33 And Hazor shall be into a dwelling place of dragons; it shall be forsaken till into without end; a man shall not dwell there, neither the son of man shall inhabit it.
JER 49:34 The word of the Lord that was made to Jeremy, the prophet, against Elam, in the beginning of the realm of Zedekiah, king of Judah, and said,
JER 49:35 The Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Lo! I shall break the bow of Elam, and I shall take the strength of them.
JER 49:36 And I shall bring on Elam four winds, from [[the]] four coasts of heaven, and I shall winnow them into all these winds, and no folk shall be, to whom the fleers of Elam shall not come.
JER 49:37 And I shall make Elam for to dread before their enemies, and in the sight of men seeking the life of them; and I shall bring on them evil, the wrath of my strong vengeance, saith the Lord; and I shall send after them a sword, till I waste them.
JER 49:38 And I shall set my king’s seat in Elam, and I shall lose thereof kings, and princes, saith the Lord.
JER 49:39 But in the last days I shall make the prisoners of Elam to turn again, saith the Lord.
JER 50:1 The word which the Lord spake of Babylon, and of the land of Chaldees, in the hand of Jeremy, the prophet.
JER 50:2 Tell ye among heathen men, and make ye heard; raise ye [[up]] a sign; preach ye, and do not ye hold still; say ye, Babylon is taken, Bel is shamed, Merodach is overcome; the graven images thereof be shamed, the idols of them be overcome.
JER 50:3 For a folk shall ascend [[or go up]] from the north against it, which folk shall set the land thereof into wilder-ness; and none shall be that shall dwell therein, from man unto beast; and they be moved, and went away.
JER 50:4 In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the sons of Israel shall come, they and the sons of Judah together, going and weeping; they shall haste, and seek their Lord God in Zion,
JER 50:5 and they shall ask the way. Hither the faces of them shall come, and they shall be set to the Lord with bond of peace everlasting, which shall not be done away by any forgetting.
JER 50:6 My people is made a lost flock, the shepherds of them deceived them, and made them to go unstably in hills; they passed from mountain into a little hill, they forgot their bed.
JER 50:7 All men that found, ate them, and the enemies of them said, We sinned not, for that they sinned to the Lord, the fairness of rightfulness, and to the Lord, the abiding of their fathers.
JER 50:8 Go ye away from the midst of Babylon, and go ye out of the land of Chaldees, and be ye as kids before the flock.
JER 50:9 For lo! I shall raise, and bring into Babylon the gathering together of great folks, from the land of the north; and they shall be made ready against it, and it shall be taken in the day; the arrows thereof as of a strong man, a slayer, shall not turn again [[void]].
JER 50:10 And Chaldea shall be into prey, all that destroy it, shall be [[ful]] filled, saith the Lord.
JER 50:11 For ye make full out joy, and speak great things, and ravish mine heritage; for ye be shed [[or poured]] out as calves on herb, and lowed, or bellowed, as bulls.
JER 50:12 Your mother is shamed greatly, and she that engendered you, is made even to dust; lo! she shall be the last among folks, and forsaken, without way, and dry.
JER 50:13 For the wrath of the Lord it shall not be inhabited, but it shall be driven all into wilderness; each that shall pass by Babylon, shall wonder, and shall hiss on all the wounds thereof.
JER 50:14 All ye that bend bow, be made ready against Babylon by compass; overcome ye it, spare ye not arrows, for it sinned to the Lord.
JER 50:15 Cry ye against it, everywhere it gave hand; the foundaments thereof fell down, and the walls thereof be destroyed; for it is the vengeance of the Lord. Take ye vengeance of it; as it did, do ye to it.
JER 50:16 Lose ye a sower of Babylon, and him that holdeth a sickle in the time of harvest, from the face of [[the]] sword of the culver; each man shall be turned to his people, and each man shall flee to his land.
JER 50:17 Israel is a scattered flock, lions casted out it; first king of Assur ate it, this last, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, did away the bones thereof.
JER 50:18 Therefore the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, Lo! I shall visit the king of Babylon, and his land, as I visited the king of Assur;
JER 50:19 and I shall bring again Israel to his dwelling place. Carmel and Bashan shall be fed, and his soul shall be [[ful]] filled in the hill [[or mount]] of Ephraim, and of Gilead.
JER 50:20 In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the wickedness of Israel shall be sought, and it shall not be; and the sin of Judah shall be sought, and it shall not be found; for I shall be merciful to them, which I shall forsake or leave.
JER 50:21 Ascend thou [[or go thou up]] on the land of the lords, and visit thou on the dwellers thereof; scatter thou, and slay those things, that be after them, saith the Lord; and do thou by all things which I commanded to thee.
JER 50:22 The voice of battle and great sorrow in the land.
JER 50:23 How is the hammer of all earth broken and all-defouled? how is Babylon turned into desert, among heathen men?
JER 50:24 Babylon, I have snared thee, and thou art taken, and thou knewest not; thou art found, and taken, for thou stirredest the Lord to wrath.
JER 50:25 The Lord opened his treasure, and brought forth the vessels of his wrath; for why a work is to the Lord God of hosts in the land of Chaldees.
JER 50:26 Come ye to it from the farthest ends, open ye, that they go out, that shall defoul it; take ye away stones from the way, and drive ye into heaps, and slay ye it, and nothing be residue.
JER 50:27 Destroy ye all the strong men thereof, go they down into slaying; woe to them, for the day of them cometh, the time of visiting of them.
JER 50:28 The voice of fleers, and of them that escaped from the land of Babylon, that they tell in Zion the vengeance of our Lord God, the vengeance of his temple.
JER 50:29 Tell ye against Babylon to full many men, to all that bend bow. Stand ye together against it by compass, and let none escape; yield ye to it after his work, after all things which it did, do ye to it; for it was raised against the Lord, against the Holy of Israel.
JER 50:30 Therefore young men thereof shall fall down in the streets thereof, and all men warriors thereof shall be stilled in that day, saith the Lord.
JER 50:31 Lo! thou proud, I to thee, saith the Lord of hosts, for thy day is come, the time of thy visitation.
JER 50:32 And the proud shall fall, and shall fall down together, and none shall be, that shall raise him; and I shall kindle fire in the cities of him, and it shall devour all things in compass of it.
JER 50:33 The Lord of hosts saith these things, The sons of Israel and the sons of Judah together suffer false challenge; all that took them, hold, they will not deliver them.
JER 50:34 The again-buyer of them is strong, the Lord of hosts is his name; by doom he shall defend the cause of them, that he make the land afeared, and stir together the dwellers of Babylon.
JER 50:35 A sword to Chaldees, saith the Lord, and to the dwellers of Babylon, and to the princes, and to the wise men thereof.
JER 50:36 A sword to the false diviners thereof, that shall be fools; a sword to the strong men thereof, that shall dread.
JER 50:37 Sword to the horses thereof, and to the chariots thereof, and to all the common people which is in the midst thereof, and they shall be as women; a sword to the treasures thereof, that shall be ravished.
JER 50:38 Dryness shall be on the waters thereof, and they shall be dry; for it is the land of graven images, and hath glory in false feignings.
JER 50:39 Therefore dragons shall dwell with fond wild men, and ostriches shall dwell therein; and it shall no more be inhabited till into without end, and it shall not be builded till to generation and generation;
JER 50:40 as the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, and the nigh cities there-of, saith the Lord. A man shall not dwell there, and the son of man shall not dwell in it.
JER 50:41 Lo! a people cometh from the north, and a great folk, and many kings shall rise together from the ends of [[the]] earth.
JER 50:42 They shall take bow and sword, they be cruel and unmerciful; the voice of them shall sound as the sea, and they shall ascend [[or go up]] on horses as a man made ready to battle, against thee, thou daughter of Babylon.
JER 50:43 The king of Babylon heard the fame of them, and his hands be made numb; anguish took him, sorrow took him, as a woman travailing of child.
JER 50:44 Lo! as a lion he shall ascend [[or goeth up]] from the pride of Jordan to the strong fairness, for I shall make him to run suddenly to it; and who shall be the chosen man whom I shall set [[or put]] before him? For who is like me? and who shall suffer me? and who is this shepherd, that shall against-stand my cheer?
JER 50:45 Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord, which he conceived in mind against Babylon, and his thoughts, which he thought on the land of Chaldees, no but the little of the flocks draw them down, no but the dwelling place of them be destroyed with them, else no man give credence to me.
JER 50:46 The earth is moved of the voice of [[the]] captivity of Babylon, and cry is heard among heathen men.
JER 51:1 The Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall raise on Babylon, and on the dwellers thereof, that raised their heart against me, as a wind of pestilence.
JER 51:2 And I shall send into Babylon winnowers, and they shall winnow it, and shall destroy the land of it; for they came on it on each side, in the day of the torment thereof.
JER 51:3 He that bendeth his bow, bend not, and a man clothed in habergeon, ascend not [[or go not up]]; do not ye spare the young men thereof, slay ye all the chivalry thereof.
JER 51:4 And slain men shall fall in the land of Chaldees, and wounded men in the countries thereof.
JER 51:5 For why Israel and Judah was not made widow from their God, the Lord of hosts; but the land of them was filled with trespass of the Holy of Israel.
JER 51:6 Flee ye from the midst of Babylon, that each man save his soul; do not ye be still on the wickedness thereof, for why time of vengeance thereof is to the Lord; he shall yield while to it.
JER 51:7 Babylon is a golden cup in the hand of the Lord, and filleth all [[the]] earth; heathen men drank of the wine thereof, and therefore they be moved.
JER 51:8 Babylon fell down suddenly, and is all-broken; yell ye on it, take ye resin to the sorrow thereof, if peradventure it be healed.
JER 51:9 We healed Babylon, and it is not made whole; forsake we it and go we each into his land; for the doom thereof came till to heavens, and is raised [[up]] till to [[the]] clouds.
JER 51:10 The Lord hath brought forth our rightfulnesses [[or rightwisenesses]]; come ye, and tell we in Zion the work of our Lord God.
JER 51:11 Sharpen ye arrows, fill ye arrow cases; the Lord hath raised the spirit of the kings of Medes, and his mind is against Babylon, that he lose it, for it is the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his temple. The king of Medes is raised of the Lord against Babylon.
JER 51:12 Raise ye a sign on the walls of Babylon, increase ye [[the]] keeping, raise ye keepers, make ye ready ambushments; for the Lord thought, and did, whatever thing he spake against the dwellers of Babylon.
JER 51:13 A! thou Babylon, that dwellest on many waters, rich in thy treasures, thine end cometh, the foot-measure of thy cutting down.
JER 51:14 The Lord of hosts swore by his soul, that I shall fill thee with men, as with bruchuses, and a merry song shall be sung on thee.
JER 51:15 The Lord swore, which made [[the]] earth by his strength, made ready the world by his wisdom, and stretched forth heavens by his prudence.
JER 51:16 When he giveth voice, waters be multiplied in heaven; which Lord raiseth clouds from [[the]] last of the earth, he made lightnings into rain, and brought forth wind of his treasures or treasuries.
JER 51:17 Each man is made a fool of knowing, each weller together is shamed in a graven image; for his welling together is false, and a spirit is not in those [[or them]].
JER 51:18 The works be vain, and worthy of scorn; they shall perish in the time of their visiting.
JER 51:19 The part of Jacob is not as these things; for he that made all things is the part of Jacob, and Israel is the sceptre of his heritage; the Lord of hosts is his name.
JER 51:20 Thou hurtlest down to me the instruments of battle, and I shall hurtle down folks in thee, and I shall lose realms in thee;
JER 51:21 and I shall hurtle down in thee an horse, and the rider thereof; and I shall hurtle down in thee a chariot, and the rider thereof;
JER 51:22 and I shall hurtle down in thee man and woman; and I shall hurtle down in thee eld [[or old]] man and child; and I shall hurtle down in thee a young man and a virgin;
JER 51:23 and I shall hurtle down in thee a shepherd and his flock; and I shall hurtle down in thee an earth-tiller and his yoke beasts; and I shall hurtle down in thee dukes and magistrates.
JER 51:24 And I shall yield, saith the Lord, to Babylon, and to all the dwellers of Chaldea, all their evil, which they did in Zion, before your eyes.
JER 51:25 Lo! I, saith the Lord, to thee, thou hill bearing pestilence, which corruptest all [[the]] earth. I shall stretch forth mine hand on thee, and I shall unwrap thee from stones, and I shall give thee into an hill of burning.
JER 51:26 And I shall not take of thee a stone into a corner, and a stone into foundaments; but thou shalt be lost without end, saith the Lord.
JER 51:27 Raise ye a sign in the land, sound ye with a clarion in hills; hallow ye folks on it, tell ye to the kings of Ararat, of Minni, and of Ashchenaz against it; number ye Tifsar, that is, the leader of the host, against it, and bring ye an horse, as a bruchus having a prick.
JER 51:28 Hallow ye folks against it, the kings of Media, the dukes thereof, and all the magistrates thereof, and all the land of his power.
JER 51:29 And the earth shall be moved, and shall be troubled; for the thought of the Lord shall fully awaken against Babylon, that he set the land of Babylon desert, and unhabitable.
JER 51:30 The strong men of Babylon ceased of battle, they dwelled in strongholds; the strength of them is devoured, and they be made as women; the tabernacles thereof be burnt, the bars thereof be all-broken.
JER 51:31 A runner shall come to meet a runner, and a messenger to meet a messenger, to tell to the king of Babylon, that his city is taken from the one end till to the tother end;
JER 51:32 and the forths be before-occupied, and the marishes be burnt with fire, and the men warriors be troubled.
JER 51:33 For the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, saith these things, The daughter of Babylon is as a cornfloor, the time of threshing thereof; yet a little, and the time of reaping thereof shall come.
JER 51:34 Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, ate me, and devoured me; he made me as a void vessel, he as a dragon swallowed me; he filled his womb with my tenderness, and he casted me out.
JER 51:35 Wickedness against me, and my flesh on Babylon, saith the dwelling [[or the dwellers]] of Zion; and my blood on the dwellers of Chaldea, saith Jerusalem.
JER 51:36 Therefore the Lord saith these things, Lo! I shall deem thy cause, and I shall avenge thy vengeance; and I shall make the sea thereof forsaken, and I shall make dry the vein thereof.
JER 51:37 And Babylon shall be into burials, it shall be the dwelling of dragons, wondering, and hissing, for that no dweller is.
JER 51:38 They shall roar together as lions, and they shall shake [[their]] locks, as the whelps of lions.
JER 51:39 In the heat of them I shall set [[or put]] the drinks of them; and I shall make them drunken, that they be brought asleep, and that they sleep everlasting sleep, and rise not, saith the Lord.
JER 51:40 I shall lead forth them, as lambs to slain sacrifice, and as wethers with kids.
JER 51:41 How is Sheshach taken, and the noble city of all earth is taken? How is Babylon made into wonder among heathen men?
JER 51:42 And the sea ascended [[or went up]] on Babylon, it was covered with the multitude of his waves.
JER 51:43 The cities thereof be made into wondering, the land is made unhabitable and forsaken; the land wherein no man dwelleth, and the son of man shall not pass by it.
JER 51:44 And I shall visit on Bel into Babylon, and I shall cast out of his mouth that, that he had swallowed, and folks shall no more flow to it; for also the wall of Babylon shall fall down.
JER 51:45 My people, go ye out from the midst thereof, that each man save his soul from the wrath of the strong vengeance of the Lord;
JER 51:46 and lest peradventure your heart wax nesh, and lest ye dread the hearing, that shall be heard in the land; and hearing shall come in a year, and after this year shall come hearing, and wickedness in the land, and a lord on a lord.
JER 51:47 Therefore lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall visit on the graven images of Babylon; and all the land thereof shall be shamed, and all slain men thereof shall fall down in the midst thereof.
JER 51:48 And heaven’s, and earth’s, and all things that be in those [[or them]], shall praise on Babylon; for raveners shall come from the north to it, saith the Lord.
JER 51:49 And as Babylon did, that slain men fell down in Israel, so of Babylon slain men shall fall down and in all the land.
JER 51:50 Come ye, that fled the sword, do not ye stand; have ye mind afar on the Lord, and Jerusalem ascend [[or go up]] on your heart.
JER 51:51 We be shamed, for we heard shame; shame covered our faces, for aliens came on the hallowing of the house of the Lord.
JER 51:52 Therefore lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall visit on the graven images of Babylon, and in all the land thereof a wounded man shall bellow.
JER 51:53 If Babylon ascendeth [[or go up]] into heaven, and maketh steadfast his strength on high, destroyers thereof shall come of me, saith the Lord.
JER 51:54 The voice of a crier of Babylon, and great sorrow of the land of Chaldees,
JER 51:55 for the Lord destroyed Babylon, and lost [[or destroyed]] of it a great voice; and the waves of them shall sound as many waters. The voice of them gave sound,
JER 51:56 for a ravener came [[up]] on it, that is, [[up]] on Babylon; and the strong men thereof be taken, and the bow of them withered, for the strong avenger, the Lord, yielding [[again]] shall yield.
JER 51:57 And I shall make drunken the princes thereof, and the wise men thereof, the dukes thereof, and the magistrates thereof, and the strong men thereof; and they shall sleep everlasting sleep, and they shall not be awakened, saith the king, the Lord of hosts is name of him.
JER 51:58 The Lord God of hosts saith these things, That broadest wall of Babylon shall be [[under]] mined with [[under]]-mining, and the high gates thereof shall be burnt with fire; and the travails of peoples shall be to nought, and the travails of heathen men shall be into fire, and shall perish.
JER 51:59 The word which Jeremy, the prophet, commanded to Seraiah, son of Neriah, son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah, the king, into Babylon, in the fourth year of his realm; forsooth Seraiah was prince of prophecy.
JER 51:60 And Jeremy wrote all the evil, that was to coming [[or to come] [up]] on Babylon, in a book, all these words that were written against Babylon.
JER 51:61 And Jeremy said to Seraiah, When thou comest into Babylon, and seest, and readest all these words,
JER 51:62 thou shalt say, Lord, thou spakest against this place, that thou shouldest lose it, that none be that dwell therein, from man unto beast, and that it be an everlasting wilderness.
JER 51:63 And when thou hast [[ful]] filled to read this book, thou shalt bind to it a stone, and thou shalt cast it forth into the midst of Euphrates;
JER 51:64 and thou shalt say, So Babylon shall be drowned, and it shall not rise from the face of torment, which I bring [[up]] on it, and it shall be destroyed. Hitherto be the words of Jeremy.
JER 52:1 Zedekiah was a son of one and twenty years, when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and the name of his mother was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremy of Libnah.
JER 52:2 And he did evils before the eyes of the Lord, by all things which Jehoiakim had done.
JER 52:3 For the strong vengeance of the Lord was in Jerusalem, and in Judah, till he casted them away from his face. And Zedekiah went away from the king of Babylon.
JER 52:4 Forsooth it was done in the ninth year of his realm, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, came, he and all his host, against Jerusalem; and they besieged it, and builded against it strongholds in compass.
JER 52:5 And the city was besieged, till to the eleventh year of the realm of Zedekiah.
JER 52:6 Forsooth in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, hunger held the city; and foods were not to the people of the land.
JER 52:7 And the city was broken, and all men warriors thereof fled; and they went out of the city in the night, by the way of the gate, which is betwixt two walls, and leadeth to the garden of the king, while [[the]] Chaldees besieged the city in compass; and they went forth by the way that leadeth into desert.
JER 52:8 Soothly the host of Chaldees pursued the king; and they took Zedekiah in desert, which is beside Jericho, and all his fellowship fled away from him.
JER 52:9 And when they had taken the king, they brought him to the king of Babylon in Riblah, which is in the land of Hamath; and the king of Babylon spake dooms to him.
JER 52:10 And the king of Babylon strangled the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes; but also he killed all the princes of Judah in Riblah.
JER 52:11 And he putted out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in stocks; and the king of Babylon brought him into Babylon, and putted him in the house of the prison, till to the day of his death.
JER 52:12 Forsooth in the ninth month, in the tenth day of the month, that is the nineteenth year of the king of Babylon, Nebuzaradan, the prince of [[the]] chivalry, that stood before the king of Babylon, came into Jerusalem.
JER 52:13 And he burnt the house of the Lord, and the house of the king, and all the houses of Jerusalem; and he burnt with fire each great house.
JER 52:14 And all the host of Chaldees, that was with the master of the chivalry, destroyed all the wall of Jerusalem by compass.
JER 52:15 Soothly Nebuzaradan, the prince of [[the]] chivalry, translated of the poor men of the people, and of the residue common people, that was left in the city, and of the fleers-over, that fled over to the king of Babylon; and he translated or brought over other men of the multitude.
JER 52:16 But Nebuzaradan, the prince of [[the]] chivalry, left of the poor men of the land vine-tillers, and earth-tillers.
JER 52:17 Also Chaldees brake the brazen pillars, that were in the house of the Lord, and the foundaments, and the brazen washing vessel, that was in the house of the Lord; and they took all the metal of those [[or of them]] into Babylon.
JER 52:18 And they took cauldrons, and fleshhooks, and psalteries, and vials, and mortars, and all brazen vessels, that were in service;
JER 52:19 they took also [[the]] water pots, and vessels of incense, and pots, and basins, and candlesticks, and mortars, and little cups; how many ever golden, golden, and how many ever silveren, silveren.
JER 52:20 The master of the chivalry took two pillars, and one washing vessel, and [[the]] twelve brazen calves, that were under the foundaments, which king Solomon had made in the house of the Lord. No weight was of the metal of all these vessels.
JER 52:21 Forsooth of the pillars, eighteen cubits of height were in one pillar, and a rope of twelve cubits encompassed it; certainly the thickness thereof was of four fingers, and was hollow within.
JER 52:22 And brazen pommels were on ever either; and the height of one pommel was of five cubits; and works like nets and pomegranates were on the crown in compass, [[all was brazen. Like manner was the second pillar, and the pomegranates; and they were upon the head in compass, all brazen, like manner of the tother pillar]].
JER 52:23 And the pomegranates were ninety and six hanging down, and all [[the]] pomegranates were encompassed with an hundred works like nets.
JER 52:24 And the master of the chivalry took Seraiah, the first priest, and Zephaniah, the second priest, and [[the]] three keepers of the vestiary.
JER 52:25 And of the city he took one chaste servant and honest, that was sovereign on the men warriors; and seven men of them that saw the face of the king, which were found in the cities; and a scribe, prince of knights, that proved [[the]] young knights; and sixty men of the people of the land, that were found in the midst of the city.
JER 52:26 Forsooth Nebuzaradan, the master of [[the]] chivalry, took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon in Riblah.
JER 52:27 And the king of Babylon smote them, and killed them in Riblah, in the land of Hamath; and Judah was translated from his land.
JER 52:28 This is the people, whom Nebu-chadnezzar translated in the seventh year; Jews, three thousand and three and twenty.
JER 52:29 In the eighteenth year, Nebuchad-nezzar translated from Jerusalem eight hundred and two and thirty persons.
JER 52:30 In the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuzaradan, the master of [[the]] chivalry, translated seven hundred and five and forty persons of Jews. Therefore all the persons were four thousand and six hundred.
JER 52:31 And it was done, in the seven and thirtieth year of the passing over of Jehoiachin, king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the five and twentieth day of the month, Evilmerodach, king of Babylon, raised [[up]] in that year of his realm the head of Jehoiachin, king of Judah; and led him out of the house of the prison,
JER 52:32 and spake good things with him. And he setted the throne of him [[or put his throne]] above the thrones of kings, that were after him in Babylon,
JER 52:33 and changed the clothes of his prison. And Jehoiachin ate bread before him ever[[more]], in all the days of his life;
JER 52:34 and his meats, everlasting meats were given to him of the king of Babylon, ordained by each day, till to the day of his death, in all the days of his life.
LAM 1:1 How sitteth alone the city that once was full of people? the lady of folks is made as a widow; the princess of provinces is made under tribute.
LAM 1:2 It weeping wept in the night, and the tears thereof be in the cheeks thereof; there is none of all the dear-worthy thereof, that comforteth it; all the friends thereof forsook it, and be made enemies to it.
LAM 1:3 Judah passed from torment and multitude of servage, it dwelled among heathen men, and found no rest; all the pursuers thereof took it among anguishes.
LAM 1:4 The ways of Zion mourn, for no men come to the solemnity; all the gates thereof be destroyed, the priests thereof wail; the virgins thereof be defouled, and it is oppressed with bitterness.
LAM 1:5 The enemies thereof be made in the head, and the enemies thereof be made rich, for the Lord spake on it. For the multitude of wickednesses thereof the little children thereof be led into captivity, before the face of the troubler.
LAM 1:6 And all the fairness of the daughter of Zion went out from the daughter of Zion; the princes thereof be made as rams not finding pastures; and went forth without strength before the face of the pursuer [[or of the follower]].
LAM 1:7 And Jerusalem bethought on the days of her affliction and of trespassing, and on all her desirable things which it had from [[the]] eld [[or old]] days; when the people thereof fell down in the hand of enemies, and none helper was; [[the]] enemies saw it, and scorned the sabbaths thereof.
LAM 1:8 Jerusalem sinned a sin, therefore it was made unsteadfast; all that glorified it forsook it, for they saw the shame thereof; forsooth it wailed, and was turned aback.
LAM 1:9 The filths thereof be in the feet thereof, and it had no mind of her end; it was put down greatly, and had no comforter; Lord, see thou my torment, for the enemy is raised [[up]].
LAM 1:10 The enemy put his hand to all the desirable things thereof; for it saw heathen men entered into thy saintuary, of which thou haddest commanded, that they should not enter into thy church.
LAM 1:11 All the people thereof was wailing and seeking bread, they gave all precious things for meat, to strengthen the soul; and the city saith, See thou, Lord, and behold, for I am made vile.
LAM 1:12 A! all ye that pass by the way, perceive, and see, if any sorrow is as my sorrow; for he gathered away my grapes from me, as the Lord spake in the day of wrath of his strong venge-ance.
LAM 1:13 From on high he sent fire in my bones, and taught me; he spreaded abroad a net to my feet, he turned me aback; he setted me desolate, meddled together all day with mourning.
LAM 1:14 The yoke of my wickednesses watched in the hand of him, those be folded together, and put on my neck; my strength is made feeble; the Lord gave me in the hand, from which I shall not be able to rise.
LAM 1:15 The Lord took away all my wor-shipful men from the midst of me; he called time against me, that he should all-foul my chosen men; the Lord stamped a presser [[or the press trod]] to the virgin, the daughter of Judah.
LAM 1:16 Therefore I am weeping, and mine eye is leading down water; for a comforter, converting my soul, is made far from me; my sons be made lost, for the enemy had the mastery.
LAM 1:17 Zion spreaded abroad his hands, none is that comforteth it; the Lord sent against Jacob enemies thereof, in the compass thereof; Jerusalem is made as defouled with unclean blood among them.
LAM 1:18 And the city saith, The Lord is just [[or rightwise]], for I stirred his mouth to wrathfulness [[or wrath]]; all peoples, I beseech, hear ye, and see my sorrow; my virgins and my young men went forth into captivity.
LAM 1:19 I called my friends, and they deceived me; my priests and mine eld [[or old]] men in the city be wasted; for they sought meat to themselves, to comfort their life [[or refresh their soul]].
LAM 1:20 See thou, Lord, for I am troubled, my womb is disturbed; mine heart is destroyed in myself, for I am full of bitterness; [[the]] sword slayeth without-forth, and like death is at home.
LAM 1:21 They heard, that I make inward wailing, and none is that comforteth me; all mine enemies heard of mine evil, they be glad, for thou hast done it; thou hast brought a day of comfort, and they shall be made like me.
LAM 1:22 All the evil of them enter before thee, and gather thou grapes away from them, as thou hast gathered grapes away from me, for my wicked-nesses; for my wailings be many, and mine heart is mourning.
LAM 2:1 How hath the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with darkness in his strong vengeance? he hath cast down from heaven into earth the noble city of Israel; and bethought not on the stool of his feet, in the day of his strong vengeance.
LAM 2:2 The Lord casted down, and spared not, all the fair things of Jacob; he destroyed in his strong vengeance the strengths or strongholds of the virgin of Judah, and casted down into [[the]] earth; he defouled the realm, and the princes thereof.
LAM 2:3 He brake in the ire [[or the wrath]] of his strong vengeance all the horn of Israel; he turned aback his right hand from the face of the enemy; and he kindled in Jacob, as fire of flame devouring in compass.
LAM 2:4 He as an enemy bent his bow, he as an adversary made steadfast his right hand; and he killed all thing that was fair in sight in the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion; he shedded [[or poured]] out his indignation as fire.
LAM 2:5 The Lord is made as an enemy; he casted down Israel, he casted down all the walls thereof; he des-troyed the strengths thereof, and filled in the daughter of Judah a man made low, and a woman made low.
LAM 2:6 And he scattered his tent as a garden, he destroyed his tabernacle; the Lord gave to forgetting in Zion a feast day, and sabbath; and put the king and priest into shame, and into the indignation of his strong venge-ance.
LAM 2:7 The Lord putted away his altar, he cursed his hallowing; he betook into the hands of the enemy the walls of the towers thereof; they gave voice in the house of the Lord, as in a solemn day.
LAM 2:8 The Lord thought to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion; he stretched forth his cord, and turned not away his hand from perdition; the forewall, either the outerward, mourned, and the wall was destroyed altogether.
LAM 2:9 The gates thereof be pitched in the earth, he lost and all-brake the bars thereof; the king thereof and the princes thereof be among heathen men; the law is not, and the prophets thereof found not of the Lord a vision, either revelation.
LAM 2:10 They sat in [[the]] earth, the eld [[or old]] men of the daughter of Zion were still; they besprinkled their heads with ashes, the elder men of Judah be girt with hair-shirts; the virgins of Judah casted down to the earth their heads.
LAM 2:11 Mine eyes failed for tears, mine entrails were troubled or disturbed; my maw was shed [[or poured]] out in [[the]] earth upon the sorrow of the daughter of my people; when a little child and [[the]] sucking infant failed in the streets of the city.
LAM 2:12 They said to their mothers, Where is wheat, and wine? when they failed as wounded men in the streets of the city; yea, when they sent out their souls in the bosom of their mothers.
LAM 2:13 To whom shall I comparison thee? either to whom shall I liken thee, thou daughter of Jerusalem? to whom shall I make thee even, and shall I comfort thee, thou virgin, the daughter of Zion? for why thy sorrow is great as the sea; who shall do medicine to thee?
LAM 2:14 Thy prophets saw to thee false things, and fond [[or foolish]]; and they opened not thy wickedness, that they should stir thee to penance; but they saw to thee false takings, and castings out.
LAM 2:15 All men passing on the way clapped with hands on thee; they hissed, and moved their head on the daughter of Jerusalem; and said, This is the city of perfect fairness, the joy of all earth.
LAM 2:16 All thine enemies opened their mouth on thee; they hissed, and gnashed with their teeth, and said, We shall devour; lo! this is the day which we abided, we found, we saw.
LAM 2:17 The Lord did those things which he thought, he [[ful]] filled his word which he had commanded from [[the]] eld [[or old]] days; he destroyed, and spared not; and made glad the enemy on thee; and enhanced the horn of thine enemies.
LAM 2:18 The heart of them cried to the Lord, on the walls of the daughter of Zion; lead thou forth tears as a strand [[or a stream]], by day and night; give thou not rest to thee, neither the apple of thine eye be still.
LAM 2:19 Rise thou together, praise thou in the night, in the beginning of the wakings [[or watches]]; shed [[or pour]] out thine heart as water, before the sight of the Lord; raise thine hands to him for the souls of thy little children, that failed for hunger in the head of all meetings of ways.
LAM 2:20 See thou, Lord, and behold, whom thou hast made so bare; therefore whether women shall eat their fruit, their little children at the measure of an hand? for a priest and prophet is slain in the saintuary of the Lord.
LAM 2:21 A child and an eld [[or old]] man lie on the earth withoutforth; my virgins and my young men fell down by sword; thou hast slain them in the day of thy strong vengeance, thou smotest and didest no mercy.
LAM 2:22 Thou calledest, as to a solemn day, them that made me afeared of compass; and none was that escaped in the day of the strong vengeance of the Lord, and was left; mine enemy wasted them, which I fed, and nourished up.
LAM 3:1 I am a man seeing my poverty in the rod of his indignation.
LAM 3:2 He drove me, and brought into darknesses, and not into light.
LAM 3:3 Only he turned into me, and turned altogether his hand all day.
LAM 3:4 He made eld my skin, and my flesh; he all-brake my bones.
LAM 3:5 He builded in my compass, and he encompassed me with gall and travail.
LAM 3:6 He setted me in dark places, as everlasting dead men.
LAM 3:7 He builded about against me, that I go not out; he aggrieved my gyves or fetters.
LAM 3:8 But and when I cry and pray, he hath excluded my prayer.
LAM 3:9 He enclosed altogether my ways with square stones; he destroyed my paths.
LAM 3:10 He is made like a bear setting ambush to me, like a lion in hid places.
LAM 3:11 He destroyed my paths, and brake me; he setted me desolate.
LAM 3:12 He bent his bow, and setted me as a sign to an arrow.
LAM 3:13 He sent in my reins the daughters of his arrow case.
LAM 3:14 I am made into scorn to all the people, the song of them all day.
LAM 3:15 He filled me with bitternesses; he greatly filled me with wormwood.
LAM 3:16 He brake at number my teeth; he fed me with ashes.
LAM 3:17 And my soul is put away; I have forgotten goods.
LAM 3:18 And I said, Mine end perished, and mine hope, from the Lord.
LAM 3:19 Have thou mind on my poverty, and going over, and on wormwood and gall.
LAM 3:20 By mind I shall be mindful; and my soul shall fail in me.
LAM 3:21 I bethink these things in mine heart, I shall hope in God.
LAM 3:22 The mercies of the Lord be many, for we be not wasted; for why his merciful doings failed not.
LAM 3:23 I knew in the morrowtide; thy faith is much [[or much is thy faith]].
LAM 3:24 My soul said, The Lord is my part; therefore I shall abide him.
LAM 3:25 The Lord is good to them that hope into him, to a soul seeking him.
LAM 3:26 It is good to abide with stillness the health of God.
LAM 3:27 It is good to a man, when he hath borne the yoke of his youth.
LAM 3:28 He shall sit alone, and he shall be still; for he raised himself above himself.
LAM 3:29 He shall set his mouth in dust, if peradventure hope is.
LAM 3:30 He shall give the cheek to a man that smiteth him; he shall be filled with shames.
LAM 3:31 For the Lord shall not put away without end.
LAM 3:32 For if he casted away, and he shall do mercy after the multitude of his mercies.
LAM 3:33 For he maked not low of his heart; and casted not away the sons of men.
LAM 3:34 That he should all-foul under his feet all the bound men of [[the]] earth.
LAM 3:35 That he should bow down the doom of a man, in the sight of the cheer of the Highest.
LAM 3:36 That he should pervert a man in his doom, the Lord knew not.
LAM 3:37 Who is this that said, that a thing should be done, when the Lord commandeth not?
LAM 3:38 Neither goods neither evils shall go out of the mouth of the Highest.
LAM 3:39 What grutched a man living, a man punished for his sins?
LAM 3:40 Search we our ways, and seek we, and turn we again to the Lord.
LAM 3:41 Raise we our hearts with hands, to the Lord into heavens.
LAM 3:42 We have done wickedly, and have stirred thee to wrath; therefore thou art not able to be prayed.
LAM 3:43 Thou coveredest in strong venge-ance, and smitedest us; thou killedest, and sparedest not.
LAM 3:44 Thou settedest a cloud to thee, that prayer pass not.
LAM 3:45 Thou settedest me, drawing up by the root, and casting out, in the midst of [[the]] peoples.
LAM 3:46 All [[the]] enemies opened their mouth on us.
LAM 3:47 Inward dread and snare is made to us, prophecy and defouling.
LAM 3:48 Mine eyes led down partings of waters, for the defouling of the daughter of my people.
LAM 3:49 Mine eye was tormented, and was not still; for no rest was.
LAM 3:50 Until the Lord beheld, and saw from heavens.
LAM 3:51 Mine eye robbed my soul in all the daughters of my city.
LAM 3:52 Mine enemies took me without cause, by hunting me as a bird.
LAM 3:53 My life slid into a pit; and they putted a stone on me.
LAM 3:54 Waters flowed over mine head; I said, I perish.
LAM 3:55 Lord, I called to help thy name, from the last pit.
LAM 3:56 Thou heardest my voice; turn thou not away thine ear from my sobbing and cries.
LAM 3:57 Thou nighedest to me in the day, wherein I called thee to help; thou saidest, Dread thou not.
LAM 3:58 Lord, again-buyer of my life, thou deemedest the cause of my soul.
LAM 3:59 Lord, thou sawest the wickedness of them against me; deem thou my doom.
LAM 3:60 Thou sawest all the strong vengeance, all the thoughts of them against me.
LAM 3:61 Lord, thou heardest the shames of them; all the thoughts of them against me.
LAM 3:62 The lips of men rising against me, and the thoughts of them against me all day.
LAM 3:63 See thou the sitting and rising again of them; I am the psalm of them.
LAM 3:64 Lord, thou shalt yield while to them, by the works of their hands.
LAM 3:65 Thou shalt give to them the shield of heart, thy travail.
LAM 3:66 Lord, thou shalt pursue them in thy strong vengeance, and thou shalt defoul them under heavens.
LAM 4:1 How is gold made dark, the best colour is changed? the stones of the saintuary be scattered in the head of all streets.
LAM 4:2 The noble sons of Zion, and clothed with the best gold, how be they areckoned into earthen vessels, into the work of the hands of a potter?
LAM 4:3 But also lamias or lamiae made naked their teats, gave milk to their whelps; the daughter of my people is cruel, as an ostrich in desert.
LAM 4:4 The tongue of the sucking child cleaved to his palate in thirst; little children asked for bread, and none was that brake to them.
LAM 4:5 They that ate lustfully, perished in ways; they that were nourished in cradles, embraced turds.
LAM 4:6 And the wickedness of the daughter of my people is made more than the sin of men of Sodom, that was destroyed in a moment, and hands took not therein.
LAM 4:7 Nazarites thereof were whiter than snow, shininger than milk; ruddier than eld [[or old]] ivory, fairer than sapphire.
LAM 4:8 The face of them was made blacker than coals, and they were not known in streets; the skin cleaved to their bones, it dried, and was made as a stick.
LAM 4:9 It was better to men slain with sword, than to men slain with hunger; for these men waxed rotten, they were wasted of the barrenness of [[the]] earth.
LAM 4:10 The hands of merciful women seethed their children; they were made the meats of those women in the sorrow of the daughter of my people.
LAM 4:11 The Lord [[ful]] filled his strong vengeance, he shedded out the ire [[or he poured out the wrath]] of his indignation; and the Lord kindled a fire in Zion, and it devoured the foundaments thereof.
LAM 4:12 The kings of [[the]] earth, and all the dwellers of the world believed not, that an adversary and [[the]] enemy should enter in by the gates of Jerusalem.
LAM 4:13 For the sins of the prophets thereof, and for [[the]] wickednesses of priests thereof, that shedded out the blood of just [[or rightwise]] men in the midst thereof.
LAM 4:14 Blind men erred in streets, they were defouled in blood; and when they might not go, they held their hems.
LAM 4:15 They cried to them, Depart away, ye defouled men, depart ye, go ye away, do not ye touch; forsooth they chided, and were stirred; they said among heathen men, God shall no more add to, that he dwell among them.
LAM 4:16 The face of the Lord parted them, he shall no more lay to, that he behold them; they were not ashamed of the faces of priests, neither they had mercy on eld [[or old]] men.
LAM 4:17 The while we stood yet, our eyes failed to our vain help; when we beheld attentive to a folk, that might not save us.
LAM 4:18 Our steps were slidery in the way of our streets; our end nighed, our days were [[ful]] filled, for our end came.
LAM 4:19 Our pursuers were swifter than the eagles of heaven; they pursued us on [[the]] hills [[or mountains]], they setted ambushments to us in desert.
LAM 4:20 The spirit of our mouth, Christ the Lord, was taken in our sins; to whom we said, We shall live in thy shadow among heathen men.
LAM 4:21 Thou daughter of Edom, make joy, and be glad, that dwellest in the land of Uz; the cup shall come also to thee, thou shalt be made drunken, and shalt be made bare.
LAM 4:22 Thou daughter of Zion, thy wickedness is [[ful]] filled; he shall not add more, that he make thee to pass over again into captivity; thou daughter of Edom, he shall visit thy wicked-ness, he shall uncover thy sins.
LAM 5:1 Lord, have thou mind what befell to us; see thou, and behold our shame.
LAM 5:2 Our heritage is turned to aliens, our houses be turned to strangers.
LAM 5:3 We be made fatherless children without a father; our mothers be as widows.
LAM 5:4 We drank our water for money, we bought our wood for silver.
LAM 5:5 We were driven by our heads, and rest was not given to faint men.
LAM 5:6 We gave hand to Egypt, and to Assyrians, that we should be [[ful]] filled with bread.
LAM 5:7 Our fathers sinned, and be not, and we bare the wickednesses of them
LAM 5:8 Servants were lords of us, and none was, that again-bought from the hand of them.
LAM 5:9 In our lives we brought bread to us, from the face of [[the]] sword in desert.
LAM 5:10 Our skin is burnt as a furnace, of the face of tempests of hunger.
LAM 5:11 They made low women in Zion, and virgins in the cities of Judah.
LAM 5:12 Princes were hanged [[up]] by the hand; they were not ashamed of the faces of eld [[or old]] men.
LAM 5:13 They misused young waxing men unchastely, and children fell down in tree.
LAM 5:14 Eld [[or Old]] men failed from [[the]] gates; young men failed from the quire or choir of singers.
LAM 5:15 The joy of our heart failed; our song is turned into mourning.
LAM 5:16 The crown of our head fell down; woe to us! for we sinned.
LAM 5:17 Therefore our heart is made sorrowful, therefore our eyes be made dark.
LAM 5:18 For the hill of Zion, for it perished; foxes went in it.
LAM 5:19 But thou, Lord, shalt dwell without end; thy seat shall dwell in generation and into generation.
LAM 5:20 Why shalt thou forget us without end, shalt thou forsake us into [[the]] length of days?
LAM 5:21 Lord, convert thou us to thee, and we shall be converted; make thou new our days, as at the beginning.
LAM 5:22 But thou casting away hast cast away us; thou art wroth against us greatly.
EZE 1:1 And it was done, in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, when I was in the midst of captives, beside the flood Chebar, heavens were opened, and I saw the revelations of God.
EZE 1:2 In the fifth day of the month; that is the fifth year of [[the]] passing over of Jehoiachin, king of Judah;
EZE 1:3 the word of the Lord was made to Ezekiel, priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of Chaldees, beside the flood Chebar; and the hand of the Lord was made there on him.
EZE 1:4 And I saw, and lo! a whirlwind came from the north, and a great cloud, and fire wrapping in, and brightness in the compass thereof; and as the likeness of electrum from the midst thereof, that is, from the midst of the fire.
EZE 1:5 And of the midst thereof was a likeness of four beasts. And this was the beholding of those [[or them]], the likeness of a man in those [[or them]].
EZE 1:6 And four faces were to one, and four wings were to one.
EZE 1:7 And the feet of those [[or them]]were straight feet, and the sole of the foot of those [[or them]]was as the sole of a foot of a calf, and sparkles, as the beholding of boiling brass.
EZE 1:8 And the hands of a man were under the wings of those [[or the pens of them]], in four parts; and those [[or they]] had faces and wings by four parts;
EZE 1:9 and the wings of those [[or them]] were joined together of one to another. They turned not again, when they went, but each went before his face.
EZE 1:10 Forsooth the likeness of the face of those [[or them]]was the face of a man, and the face of a lion, at the right half of those four. Forsooth the face of an ox was at the left half of those four; and the face of an eagle was above those four.
EZE 1:11 And the faces of those [[or them]] and wings of those [[or them]]were stretched forth above. Two wings of each were joined together, and twain [[or two]] covered the bodies of those [[or them]].
EZE 1:12 And each of those [[or them]] went before his face. Where the fierceness of the wind was, thither those [[or they]] went, and turned not again, when they went.
EZE 1:13 And the likeness of the beasts, and the beholding of them, was as of burning coals of fire, and as the beholding of lamps. This was the sight running about in the midst of [[the]] beasts, the shining of fire, and the lightning going out of the fire.
EZE 1:14 And the beasts went, and turned again, at the likeness of lightning shining.
EZE 1:15 And when I beheld the beasts, one wheel, having four faces, appeared on the earth, beside the beasts.
EZE 1:16 And the beholding of the wheels and the work of those [[or them]]was as the sight of the sea; and one likeness was of those four; and the beholding and the works of those [[or them]], as if a wheel be in the midst of a wheel.
EZE 1:17 Those [[or They]] going went by four parts of those [[or them]], and turned not again, when those [[or they]] went.
EZE 1:18 Also stature, and highness, and horrible beholding was to the wheels; and all the body of them was full of eyes in the compass of those four.
EZE 1:19 And when the beasts went, the wheels also went together beside those [[or them]]. And when the beasts were raised [[up]] from the earth, the wheels also were raised [[up]] together.
EZE 1:20 Whither ever the spirit went, when the spirit went thither, also the wheels following it were raised [[up]] together with them; for why the spirit of life was in the wheels.
EZE 1:21 Those [[or they]] went with the beasts going, and those [[or they]] stood with the beasts standing. And with the beasts raised from [[the]] earth, also the wheels pursuing those beasts were raised together; for the spirit of life was in the wheels.
EZE 1:22 And the likeness of the firmament was above the head[[s]] of the beasts, and as the beholding of horrible crystal, and stretched abroad on the heads of those beasts above.
EZE 1:23 Forsooth under the firmament the wings of those beasts were straight out, of one to another; each beast covered his body with two wings, and another was covered in like manner.
EZE 1:24 And I heard the sound of wings, as the sound of many waters, as the sound of high God. When those [[or they]] went, there was as a sound of a multitude, as the sound of hosts of battle; and when those [[or they]] stood, the wings of those [[or them]] were let down.
EZE 1:25 For why when a voice was made on the firmament, that was on the head[[s]] of those [[or them]], those [[or they]] stood, and let down their wings.
EZE 1:26 And on the firmament, that was above the heads of those [[or them]], was as the beholding of a sapphire stone, in the likeness of a throne; and on the likeness of the throne was a likeness, as the beholding of a man above.
EZE 1:27 And I saw as a likeness of electrum, as the beholding of fire within, by the compass thereof; from the loins of him and above, and from the loins of him till to beneath, I saw as the likeness of fire, shining in compass,
EZE 1:28 as the beholding of the rainbow, when it is in the cloud in the day of rain. This was the beholding of shining by compass. This was a sight of the likeness of the glory of the Lord. And I saw, and I fell down on my face; and I heard the voice of a speaker.
EZE 2:1 And he said to me, Thou, son of man [[or Son of man]], stand on thy feet, and I shall speak with thee.
EZE 2:2 And the spirit entered into me, after that he spake to me, and setted me on my feet. And I heard one speaking to me,
EZE 2:3 and saying, Son of man, I send thee to the sons of Israel, to folks apostates, either going aback from faith, that went away from me; the fathers of them brake my covenant till to this day.
EZE 2:4 And the sons be of hard face, and of unchastiseable heart, to whom I send thee. And thou shalt say to them, The Lord God saith these things;
EZE 2:5 if peradventure namely they hear, and if peradventure they rest, for it is an house stirring to wrath. And they shall know, that a prophet is in the midst of them.
EZE 2:6 Therefore thou, son of man, dread not them, neither dread thou the words of them; for unbelieveful men and destroyers be with thee, and thou dwellest with scorpions. Dread thou not the words of them, and dread thou not the faces of them, for it is an house stirring to wrath.
EZE 2:7 Therefore thou shalt speak my words to them, if peradventure they hear, and rest, for they be stirrers to wrath.
EZE 2:8 But thou, son of man, hear what-ever things I shall speak to thee; and do not thou be a stirrer to wrath, as the house of Israel is a stirrer to wrath. Open thy mouth, and eat whatever things I give to thee.
EZE 2:9 And I saw, and lo! an hand was sent to me, in which a book was folded together.
EZE 2:10 And he spreaded abroad it before me, that was written within and withoutforth. And lamentations, and song, and woe, were written therein.
EZE 3:1 And he said to me, Son of man, eat thou whatever thing thou findest, eat thou this volume; and go thou, and speak to the sons of Israel.
EZE 3:2 And I opened my mouth, and he fed me with that volume.
EZE 3:3 And he said to me, Son of man, thy womb shall eat, and thine entrails shall be filled with this volume, which I give to thee. And I ate it, and it was made as sweet honey in my mouth.
EZE 3:4 And he said to me, Son of man, go thou to the house of Israel, and thou shalt speak my words to them.
EZE 3:5 For thou shalt not be sent to a people of high word, and of unknown language; thou shalt be sent to the house of Israel,
EZE 3:6 neither to many peoples of high word, and of unknown language, of which thou mayest not hear the words. And if thou were sent to them, they should hear thee.
EZE 3:7 But the house of Israel will not hear thee, for they will not hear me. For all the house of Israel is of defouled, either of unshamefast, forehead, and of hard heart.
EZE 3:8 Lo! I gave thy face stronger than the faces of them, and thy forehead harder than the foreheads of them.
EZE 3:9 And I gave thy face as an adamant, and as a flint; dread thou not them, neither dread thou of the face of them, for it is an house stirring me to wrath.
EZE 3:10 And he said to me, Son of man, take in thine heart, and hear with thine ears all these my words, which I speak to thee.
EZE 3:11 And go thou, and enter to the passing over, to the sons of thy people. And thou shalt speak to them, and thou shalt say to them, The Lord God saith these things, if peradventure they hear, and rest.
EZE 3:12 And the spirit took me, and I heard after me the voice of a great moving. The blessed glory of the Lord was heard from his place;
EZE 3:13 and I heard the voice of wings of the beasts smiting one another, and the voice of wheels pursuing the beasts, and the voice of a great stirring.
EZE 3:14 Also the spirit raised me, and took me. And I went forth bitter in the indignation of my spirit; for the hand of the Lord was with me, and comforted me.
EZE 3:15 And I came to the passing over, to the heap of new fruits, to them that dwelled beside the flood Chebar. And I sat where they sat, and I dwelled there seven days, wailing, in the midst of them.
EZE 3:16 Forsooth when seven days were passed, the word of the Lord was made to me, and said,
EZE 3:17 Son of man, I gave thee to be an espyer, or a beholder, to the house of Israel. And thou shalt hear of my mouth a word, and thou shalt tell [[it]] to them of me.
EZE 3:18 If when I say to the wicked man, Thou shalt die by death, thou tellest it not to him, and speakest not to him, that he be turned from his wicked way, and live; that wicked man shall die in his wickedness, but I shall seek his blood of thine hand.
EZE 3:19 Forsooth if thou tellest to the wicked man, and he is not converted from his wickedness, and from his wicked way; soothly he shall die in his wickedness, but thou hast delivered thy soul.
EZE 3:20 But also if a just [[or rightwise]] man is turned from his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], and doeth wickedness, I shall set an hurting before him; he shall die, for thou toldest not to him; he shall die in his sin, and his rightfulnesses [[or rightwisenesses]], which he did, shall not be in mind, but I shall seek his blood of thine hand.
EZE 3:21 Forsooth if thou tellest to a just man, that a just man do not sin, and he sin not, he living shall live, for thou toldest to him, and thou hast delivered thy soul.
EZE 3:22 And the hand of the Lord was made [[up]] on me, and he said to me, Rise thou, and go out into the field, and there I shall speak with thee.
EZE 3:23 And I rose, and went out into the field. And lo! the glory of the Lord stood there, as the glory which I saw beside the flood Chebar; and I fell down on my face.
EZE 3:24 And the spirit entered into me, and setted me on my feet. And he spake to me, and said to me, Enter thou, and be thou enclosed in the midst of thine house.
EZE 3:25 And thou, son of man, lo! bonds be given on thee, and they shall bind thee with those [[or them]], and thou shalt not go out in the midst of them.
EZE 3:26 And I shall make thy tongue to cleave to the roof of thy mouth, and thou shalt be dumb, and thou shalt not be as a man rebuking; for it is an house stirring to wrath.
EZE 3:27 But when I shall speak to thee, I shall open thy mouth, and thou shalt say to them, The Lord saith these things, He that heareth, hear, and he that resteth, rest; for it is an house stirring to wrath.
EZE 4:1 And thou, son of man, take to thee a tilestone; and thou shalt set it before thee, and thou shalt describe therein the city of Jerusalem.
EZE 4:2 And thou shalt ordain besieging against that Jerusalem; and thou shalt build strongholds, and thou shalt bear together [[an heap of]] earth, and thou shalt give hosts of battle against it, and thou shalt set engines by compass.
EZE 4:3 And take thou to thee an iron frying pan; and thou shalt set it into an iron wall betwixt thee and betwixt the city; and thou shalt set steadfastly thy face to it, and it shall be into besieging, and thou shalt encompass it; it is a sign to the house of Israel.
EZE 4:4 And thou shalt sleep on thy left side, and thou shalt put the wicked-nesses of the house of Israel on that side; in the number of days in which thou shalt sleep on that side, and thou shalt take the wickedness of them.
EZE 4:5 Forsooth I gave to thee the years of the wickedness of them by number of days, three hundred and ninety days; and thou shalt bear the wicked-ness of the house of Israel.
EZE 4:6 And when thou hast [[ful]] filled these things, thou shalt sleep the second time on thy right side. And thou shalt take the wickedness of the house of Judah by forty days; I gave to thee a day for a year, a day soothly for a year.
EZE 4:7 And thou shalt turn thy face to the besieging of Jerusalem; and thine arm shall be stretched forth, and thou shalt prophesy against it.
EZE 4:8 Lo! I have encompassed thee with bonds, and thou shalt not turn thee from this side into the other side, till thou [[ful]] fill the days of thy besieging.
EZE 4:9 And take thou to thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentils, and millet, and fitches; and thou shalt put those [[or them]] into one vessel. And thou shalt make to thee loaves for the number of days, by which thou shalt sleep on thy side; by three hundred and ninety days thou shalt eat it.
EZE 4:10 Forsooth thy meat, which thou shalt eat, shall be in weight twenty staters in a day; from time till to time thou shalt eat it.
EZE 4:11 And thou shalt drink water in measure, the sixth part of hin; from time till to time thou shalt drink it.
EZE 4:12 And thou shalt eat it as barley bread baked under the ashes; and with the dung that goeth out of a man thou shalt cover it, before the eyes of them.
EZE 4:13 The Lord saith these things, So the sons of Israel shall eat their bread defouled among heathen men, to whom I shall cast them out.
EZE 4:14 And I said, A! A! A! Lord God, lo! my soul is not defouled, and from my young childhood till to now I ate not a thing dead by itself, and rent of beasts; and all unclean flesh entered not into my mouth.
EZE 4:15 And he said to me, Lo! I have given to thee the dung of oxes [[or oxen]] for men’s turds; and thou shalt make ready thy bread with it instead.
EZE 4:16 And he said to me, Son of man, lo! I shall all-break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat their bread in weight and in busyness, and they shall drink water in measure and in anguish;
EZE 4:17 that when bread and water fail, each man fall down to his brother, and they fail in their wickednesses.
EZE 5:1 And thou, son of man, take to thee a sharp sword, [[or razor]], for shaving hairs; and thou shalt take it, and shalt lead it by thine head, and by thy beard. And thou shalt take to thee a balance of weights, and thou shalt part those [[or them]].
EZE 5:2 Thou shalt burn the third part with fire in the midst of the city, by the [[ful]] filling of days of besieging. And thou shalt take the third part, and shalt cut by sword in the compass thereof. But thou shalt scatter the tother third part into the wind; and I shall make naked a sword after them.
EZE 5:3 And thou shalt take thereof a little number of those hairs, and thou shalt bind those [[or them]] in the highness of thy mantle.
EZE 5:4 And again thou shalt take of them, and thou shalt cast forth them into the midst of the fire. And thou shalt burn them in fire; and fire shall go out of that into all the house of Israel.
EZE 5:5 The Lord God saith these things, This is Jerusalem; I have set [[or put]] it in the midst of heathen men, and lands in the compass thereof.
EZE 5:6 And it despised my dooms, that it was more wicked than heathen men; and it despised my commandments more than lands that be in the compass thereof. For they have cast away my dooms, and they went not in my commandments.
EZE 5:7 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, For ye have passed heathen men that be in your compass, and ye went not in my commandments, and ye did not my dooms, and ye wrought not by the dooms of heathen men that be in your compass;
EZE 5:8 therefore the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I to thee, and I myself shall make dooms in the midst of thee, before the eyes of heathen men;
EZE 5:9 and I shall do things in thee which I did not, and to which I shall no more make like things, for all thine abominations.
EZE 5:10 Therefore fathers shall eat sons in the midst of thee, and sons shall eat their fathers; and I shall make dooms in thee, and I shall winnow all thine remnants into each wind;
EZE 5:11 Therefore I live, saith the Lord God, no but for that that thou defouledest mine holy thing in all thine offences, and in all thine abom-inations; and I shall break, and mine eye shall not spare, and I shall not do mercy.
EZE 5:12 The third part of thee shall die by pestilence, and shall be wasted by hunger in the midst of thee; and the third part of thee shall fall down by sword in thy compass; forsooth I shall scatter thy third part into each wind, and I shall draw out a sword after them.
EZE 5:13 And I shall [[ful]] fill my strong vengeance, and I shall make mine indignation to rest in them, and I shall be comforted. And they shall know, that I the Lord spake in my fervent love, when I shall [[ful]] fill all mine indignation in them.
EZE 5:14 And I shall give thee into desert, [[and]] into shame to heathen men that be in thy compass, in the sight of each that passeth forth.
EZE 5:15 And thou shalt be shame and blasphemy, ensample and wondering, among heathen men that be in thy compass, when I shall make dooms in thee, in strong vengeance, and indignation, and in blamings of ire. I the Lord have spoken,
EZE 5:16 when I shall send into them the worst arrows of hunger, that shall bear death; and which I shall send, that I lose you. And I shall gather hunger [[up]] on you, and I shall all-break in you the firmness of bread.
EZE 5:17 And I shall send into you hunger, and worst beasts, till to the death; and pestilence and blood shall pass by thee, and I shall bring in [[a]] sword on thee; I the Lord spake.
EZE 6:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 6:2 Thou, son of man, set thy face toward the hills of Israel; and thou shalt prophesy to those hills,
EZE 6:3 and shalt say, Hills of Israel, hear ye the word of the Lord God. The Lord God saith these things to mountains, and little hills, to rocks of stone, and to valleys, Lo! I shall bring in on you a sword, and I shall lose your high things or places.
EZE 6:4 And I shall destroy your altars, and your simulacra shall be broken; and I shall cast down your slain men before your idols.
EZE 6:5 And I shall give the dead bodies of the sons of Israel before the face of your simulacra, and I shall scatter your bones about your altars,
EZE 6:6 in all your dwellings. Cities shall be forsaken, and high things shall be destroyed, and shall be scattered; and your altars shall perish, and shall be broken. And your idols shall cease to exist, and your temples of idols shall be all-broken, and your works shall be done away.
EZE 6:7 And a slain man shall fall down in the midst of you; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 6:8 And I shall leave in you them that fled [[the]] sword, to go among heathen men, when I shall scatter you into lands.
EZE 6:9 And your delivered men shall have mind on me among heathen men, to which they be led prisoners; for I have all-broken their heart doing fornication, and going away from me, and their eyes doing fornication after their idols. And they shall displease themselves on the evils, which they did in all their abominations.
EZE 6:10 And they shall know, that I the Lord spake not in vain, that I should do this evil to them.
EZE 6:11 The Lord God saith these things, Smite thine hand, and hurtle thy foot, and say, Alas! to all abominations of the evils of the house of Israel; for they shall fall down by sword, hunger, and pestilence.
EZE 6:12 He that is far, shall die by pestilence. Forsooth he that is nigh, shall fall by sword. And he that is left and besieged, shall die by hunger. And I shall [[ful]] fill mine indignation in them.
EZE 6:13 And ye shall know, that I am the Lord, when your slain men shall be in the midst of your idols, in the compass of your altars, in each high little hill, and in all the highnesses of mountains, and under each tree full of wood, and under each oak full of boughs, that is, a place where they burnt incense sweet smelling to all their idols.
EZE 6:14 And I shall stretch forth mine hand on them, and I shall make their land desolate and destitute, from desert unto Diblath, in all the dwellings of them; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 7:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, saying,
EZE 7:2 And thou, son of man, the Lord God of the land of Israel saith these things, The end cometh, the end cometh, on [[the]] four coasts of the land.
EZE 7:3 Now an end is[[up]] on thee, and I shall send in my strong vengeance [[up]] on thee, and I shall deem thee by thy ways, and I shall set all thine abominations against thee.
EZE 7:4 And mine eye shall not spare on thee, and I shall not do mercy. But I shall set [[or put]] thy ways [[up]] on thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 7:5 The Lord God saith these things, Lo! torment, lo! torment cometh;
EZE 7:6 the end cometh, the end cometh; it shall wake fully against thee; lo! it cometh.
EZE 7:7 Sorrow cometh [[up]] on thee, that dwellest in the land; the time cometh, the day of slaying is nigh, and not of glory of hills.
EZE 7:8 Now anon I shall shed [[or pour]] out mine ire on thee, and I shall [[ful]] fill my strong vengeance in thee; and I shall deem thee by thy ways, and I shall put to thee all thy great trespasses.
EZE 7:9 And mine eye shall not spare, neither I shall do mercy; but I shall put on thee thy ways, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord smiting.
EZE 7:10 Lo! the day, lo! it cometh; sorrow is gone out. A rod flowered, pride burgeoned,
EZE 7:11 wickedness rose in the rod of unpiety; not anything of them shall remain, and not of the people, neither of the sound of them, and no rest shall be in them.
EZE 7:12 The time cometh, the day nighed; he that buyeth, be not glad, and he that selleth, mourn not; for why ire [[or wrath]]is on all the people thereof.
EZE 7:13 For he that selleth, shall not turn again to that that he sold, and yet the life of them is in livers; for why the vision, either revelation, to all the multitude thereof shall not go again, and a man shall not be strengthened in the wickedness of his life.
EZE 7:14 Sing ye with a trump, all men be made ready, and none is that shall go to battle; for why my wrath is on all the people thereof.
EZE 7:15 Sword is without, pestilence and hunger within; he that is in the field, shall die by sword; and they that be in the city, shall be devoured by pestilence and hunger.
EZE 7:16 And they shall be saved that flee of them; and they shall be as culvers of great valleys in [[the]] hills, all-quaking, each man in his wickedness.
EZE 7:17 All hands shall be made numb, and all knees shall flow with waters.
EZE 7:18 And they shall gird them with hair-shirts, and inward dread shall cover them; and shame shall be in each face, and baldness shall be in all the heads of them.
EZE 7:19 The silver of them shall be cast out, and the gold of them shall be into a dunghill; the silver of them and the gold of them shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the strong vengeance of the Lord. They shall not [[ful]] fill their souls, and the wombs of them shall not be filled; for it is made the cause of stumbling out of their wickedness.
EZE 7:20 And they setted the ornament of their brooches into pride; and they made of it the images of their abominations and simulacra. For this thing I gave it to them, into uncleanness.
EZE 7:21 And I shall give it into the hands of aliens, to ravish, and to the unpious men of earth, into prey, and they shall defoul it.
EZE 7:22 And I shall turn away my face from them, and they shall defoul my private place; and knaves shall enter into it, and shall defoul it.
EZE 7:23 Make thou a closing together; for the land is full of doom of bloods, and the city is full of wickedness.
EZE 7:24 And I shall bring the worst of heathen men, and they shall have in possession the houses of them; and I shall make the pride of mighty men to cease, and enemies shall have in possession the saintuaries of them.
EZE 7:25 In anguish coming above, they shall seek peace, and it shall not be.
EZE 7:26 Disturbing shall come on disturbing, and hearing on hearing; and they shall seek of the prophet a revelation, and law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the elder men.
EZE 7:27 The king shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed in wailing, and the hands of the people of the land shall be disturbed [[or troubled]]; by the ways of them I shall do to them, and by the dooms of them I shall deem them; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 8:1 And it was done in the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth day of the month, I sat in mine house, and the eld [[or old]] men of Judah sat before me; and the hand of the Lord God fell there [[up]] on me.
EZE 8:2 And I saw, and lo! a likeness as the beholding of fire; from the beholding of his loins and beneath was fire, and from his loins and above was as the beholding of shining, as the sight of electrum, [[that is, metal made of gold and silver, brighter than gold]].
EZE 8:3 And the likeness of an hand was sent out, and took me by the hair, either locks, of mine head; and the spirit raised me [[up]] betwixt heaven and earth, and brought me into Jerusalem, in the sight of God, beside the inner door that beheld to the north, where the idol of envy was set, to stir indignation.
EZE 8:4 And lo! the glory of God of Israel was there, by the sight which I saw in the field.
EZE 8:5 And he said to me, Thou, son of man, raise up thine eyes to the way of the north; and I raised mine eyes to the way of the north, and lo! from the north of the gate of the altar, the idol of envy was in that entering.
EZE 8:6 And he said to me, Son of man, guessest thou whether thou seest what thing these men do, the great abominations which the house of Israel doeth here, that I go far away from my saintuary? and yet thou shalt turn, and shalt see greater abominations.
EZE 8:7 And he led me within to the door of the foreyard; and I saw, and lo! one hole in the wall.
EZE 8:8 And he said to me, Son of man, dig thou in the wall; and when I had digged in the wall, one door appeared.
EZE 8:9 And he said to me, Enter thou, and see the worst abominations, which these men do here.
EZE 8:10 And I entered, and saw; and lo! each likeness of reptiles, either creeping beasts, and abominations of beasts, and all [[the]] idols of the house of Israel, were painted in the wall all about in compass.
EZE 8:11 And seventy men of the elders of the house of Israel stood; and Jaa-zaniah, the son of Shaphan, stood in the midst of them, standing before the paintings; and each man had a censer in his hand, and the smoke of a cloud of incense went up.
EZE 8:12 And he said to me, Certainly, son of man, thou seest what things the elder men of the house of Israel do in darknesses, each man in the hid place of his bed; for they say, The Lord seeth not us, the Lord hath forsaken the land.
EZE 8:13 And the Lord said to me, Yet thou shalt turn, and shalt see greater abominations, which these men do.
EZE 8:14 And he led me within, by the door of the gate of the house of the Lord, which door beheld to the north; and lo! women sat there, bewailing Adonis or Tammuz.
EZE 8:15 And the Lord said to me, Certainly, son of man, thou hast seen; yet thou shalt turn, and shalt see greater abominations than these.
EZE 8:16 And he led me within, into the inner foreyard of the house of the Lord; and lo! in the door of the temple of the Lord, betwixt the porch and the altar, were as five and twenty men having their backs against the temple of the Lord, and their faces to the east; and they worshipped at the rising of the sun.
EZE 8:17 And the Lord said to me, Certainly, son of man, thou hast seen; whether this is a light thing to the house of Judah, that they should do these abominations, which they did here? For they filled the land with wicked-ness, and turned to stir me to wrath; and lo! they apply a branch to their nostrils.
EZE 8:18 Therefore and I shall do in strong vengeance; mine eye shall not spare, neither I shall do mercy; and when they shall cry to mine ears with great voice, I shall not hear them.
EZE 9:1 And he cried in mine ears with great voice, and said, The visitings of the city have nighed, and each man hath in his hand an instrument of slaying.
EZE 9:2 And lo! six men came from the way of the higher gate, that beholdeth to the north, and the instrument of death of each man was in his hand; also one man in the midst of them was clothed with linen clothes, and a penner of a writer at his reins; and they entered, and stood beside the brazen altar.
EZE 9:3 And the glory of the Lord of Israel was taken up from cherub [[or cherubim]], which glory was on it, to the thresh-old of the house; and the Lord called the man that was clothed with linen clothes, and had a penner of a writer in his loins.
EZE 9:4 And the Lord said to him, Pass thou by the midst of the city, in the midst of Jerusalem, and mark thou Tau on the foreheads of men wailing and sorrowing on all [[the]] abominations that be done in the midst thereof.
EZE 9:5 And he said to them in mine hearing, Go ye through the city, and follow ye him, and smite ye; your eye spare not, neither do ye mercy.
EZE 9:6 Slay ye till to death, an eld [[or old]] man, a young man, and a virgin, a little child, and women; but slay ye not any man, on whom ye see Tau; and begin ye at my saintuary. There-fore they began at the elder men, that were before the face of the house.
EZE 9:7 And he said to them, Defoul ye the house of the Lord, and fill ye the foreyards with slain men; go ye out. And they went out, and killed them that were in the city.
EZE 9:8 And lo! when the slaying was [[ful]] filled, I was left alone. And I fell down on my face, and I cried, and said, Alas! alas! alas! Lord God, therefore whether thou shalt lose all the remnants of Israel, and shalt shed out thy strong vengeance on Jerusalem?
EZE 9:9 And he said to me, The wicked-ness of the house of Israel and of Judah is full great, and the land is filled of bloods, and the city is filled with turning away; for they said, The Lord hath forsaken the land, and the Lord seeth not.
EZE 9:10 Therefore and mine eye shall not spare, neither I shall do mercy; I shall yield the way of them on the head of them.
EZE 9:11 And lo! the man that was clothed in linen clothes, that had a penner in his back, answered a word, and said, I have done, as thou commandedest to me.
EZE 10:1 And I saw, and lo! in the firmament that was on the heads of cherubims [[or cherubim]], as a sapphire stone, and as the form of likeness of a king’s seat appeared thereon.
EZE 10:2 And he said to the man that was clothed in linen clothes, and spake, Enter thou in the midst of the wheels, that be under cherubims [[or cherubim]], and fill thine hand with coals of fire, that be betwixt cherubims [[or cherubim]], and shed thou out on the city. And he entered in my sight;
EZE 10:3 forsooth cherubims stood at the right side of the house of the Lord, when the man entered, and a cloud filled the inner foreyard.
EZE 10:4 And the glory of the Lord was raised [[up]] from above cherubims [[or cherubim]] to the threshold of the house; and the house was filled with a cloud, and the foreyard was filled with shining of the glory of the Lord.
EZE 10:5 And the sound of wings of cherubims [[or cherubim]] was heard till to the outermore foreyard, as the voice of Almighty God speaking.
EZE 10:6 And when he had commanded to the man that was clothed in linen clothes, and had said, Take thou fire from the midst of the wheels, that be betwixt cherubims [[or cherubim]], he entered, and stood beside the wheel[[s]].
EZE 10:7 And cherub stretched forth his hand from the midst of cherubims [[or cherubim]], to the fire that was betwixt cherubims [[or cherubim]]; and took, and gave into the hands of him that was clothed in linen clothes; and he took, and went out.
EZE 10:8 And the likeness of the hand of a man appeared in cherubims [[or cherubim]], under the wings of those [[or them]].
EZE 10:9 And I saw, and lo! four wheels were beside cherubims [[or cherubim]]; one wheel beside one cherub, and another wheel beside another cherub; forsooth the likeness of wheels was as the sight of the stone chrysolyte.
EZE 10:10 And the beholding of those [[or them]]was one likeness of four, as if a wheel be in the midst of a wheel.
EZE 10:11 And when they went, they went into four parts; those [[or they]] turned not again going, but to the place to which that that was the first wheel bowed to go, also [[the]] others followed, and turned not again.
EZE 10:12 And all the body of those wheels, and the necks, and hands, and wings of the beasts, and the circles, were full of eyes, in the compass of four wheels.
EZE 10:13 And he called those wheels voluble, or able to go all about, in mine hearing.
EZE 10:14 Forsooth one beast had four faces; one face was the face of cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and in the third was the face of a lion, and in the fourth was the face of an eagle;
EZE 10:15 and the cherubims were raised [[up]]. That is the beast, which I had seen beside the flood Chebar.
EZE 10:16 And when cherubims went, also the wheels beside those [[or them]] went together with them; when the cherubims raised [[up]] their wings, that those [[or they]] should be enhanced from the earth, the wheels abided not still, but also those [[or they]] were beside cherubims.
EZE 10:17 The wheels stood with those cherubims standing, and were raised [[up]] with the cherubims raised [[up]]; for the spirit of life was in those wheels.
EZE 10:18 And the glory of the Lord went out from the threshold of the temple, and stood on the cherubims [[or cherubim]].
EZE 10:19 And [[the]] cherubims raised [[up]] their wings, and were enhanced from the earth before me; and when those went out, also the wheels pursued; and it stood in the entering of the east gate of the house of the Lord, and the glory of God of Israel was on those.
EZE 10:20 That is the beast, which I saw under God of Israel, beside the flood Chebar. And I understood that four cherubims were;
EZE 10:21 four faces were to one, and four wings to one; and the likeness of the hand of a man was under the wings of those [[or them]].
EZE 10:22 And the likeness of the cheers of those [[or them]]were those cheers which I had seen beside the flood Chebar; and the beholding of those [[or them]], and the fierceness of each, was to enter before his face.
EZE 11:1 And the spirit raised me [[up]], and led me within to the east gate of the house of the Lord, that beholdeth the rising of the sun. And lo! in the entering of the gate were five and twenty men; and I saw in the midst of them Jaazaniah, the son of Azur, and Pelatiah, the son of Benaiah, princes of the people.
EZE 11:2 And he said to me, Thou, son of man, these be the men that think wickedness, and treat the worst counsel in this city,
EZE 11:3 and say, Whether houses were not builded a while ago? this is the cauldron, forsooth we be fleshes.
EZE 11:4 Therefore prophesy thou of them, prophesy thou, son of man.
EZE 11:5 And the Spirit of the Lord fell into me, and said to me, Speak thou, The Lord saith these things, Ye house of Israel spake thus, and I knew the thoughts of your heart;
EZE 11:6 ye killed full many men in this city, and ye filled the ways thereof with slain men.
EZE 11:7 Therefore the Lord saith these things, Your slain men, which ye putted in the midst thereof, these be the fleshes, and this is the cauldron; and I shall lead you out of the midst thereof.
EZE 11:8 Ye dreaded sword, and I shall bring in a sword on you, saith the Lord God.
EZE 11:9 And I shall cast you out of the midst thereof, and I shall give you into the hand of enemies, and I shall make dooms in you.
EZE 11:10 By sword ye shall fall down, I shall deem you in the ends of Israel; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 11:11 This shall not be to you into a cauldron, and ye shall not be into fleshes in the midst thereof; I shall deem you in the ends of Israel,
EZE 11:12 and ye shall know, that I am the Lord. For ye went not in my behests, and ye did not my dooms, but ye wrought by the dooms of heathen men, that be in your compass.
EZE 11:13 And it was done, when I prophe-sied, Pelatiah, the son of Benaiah, was dead; and I fell down on my face, and I cried with great voice, and said, Alas! alas! alas! Lord God, thou makest [[an]] ending of the remnants of Israel.
EZE 11:14 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and said,
EZE 11:15 Son of man, thy brethren, thy brethren, thy kinsmen, and all the house of Israel, and all men, to whom the dwellers of Jerusalem said, Go ye away far from the Lord, the land is given to us into possession.
EZE 11:16 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, For I made them to be far off among heathen men, and for I scattered them in lands, I shall be to them into a little hallowing, in the lands to which they came.
EZE 11:17 Therefore speak thou, The Lord God saith these things, I shall gather you from peoples, and I shall gather you together from lands, in which ye be scattered; and I shall give the earth of Israel to you.
EZE 11:18 And they shall enter thither, and shall do away all offences, [[or grievings]], and all abominations thereof in that day.
EZE 11:19 And I shall give to them one heart, and I shall give a new spirit in the entrails of them; and I shall take away a stony heart from the flesh of them, and I shall give to them an heart of flesh;
EZE 11:20 that they go in my commandments, and keep my dooms, and do those [[or them]]; and that they be into a people to me, and I be into God to them.
EZE 11:21 But of which the heart goeth after their offendings and abominations, I shall set [[or put]] the way of them in their head, saith the Lord God.
EZE 11:22 And the cherubims raised [[up]] their wings, and the wheels went with those [[or them]], and the glory of God of Israel was on those [[or them]].
EZE 11:23 And the glory of the Lord ascended [[or went up]] from the midst of the city, and stood on the hill, which is at the east of the city.
EZE 11:24 And the spirit raised me, and brought me into Chaldea, to the passing over, in [[a]] vision by the spirit of God; and the vision which I had seen, was taken away from me.
EZE 11:25 And I spake to the passing over all the words of the Lord, which he had showed to me.
EZE 12:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 12:2 Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of an house stirring to wrath, which have eyes to see, and see not, and ears to hear, and hear not; for it an house stirring to wrath.
EZE 12:3 Therefore thou, son of man, make to thee vessels of passing over, and thou shalt pass over by day before them; forsooth thou shalt pass over from thy place to another place, in the sight of them; if peradventure they behold, for it is an house stirring to wrath.
EZE 12:4 And thou shalt bear withoutforth thy vessels, as the vessels of a man passing over by day, in the sight of them; soothly thou shalt go out in the eventide before them, as a man passing forth goeth out.
EZE 12:5 Before the eyes of them dig through the wall to thee, and thou shalt go out through it,
EZE 12:6 in the sight of them. Thou shalt be borne on shoulders, thou shalt be borne out in darkness; thou shalt cover thy face, and thou shalt not see the earth, for I have given thee to be a sign of thing to coming to the house of Israel.
EZE 12:7 Therefore I did as the Lord commanded to me; I brought forth my vessels, as the vessels of a man passing over by day, and in the eventide I digged through a wall to me with mine hand; I went out in darkness, and I or it was borne on shoulders, in the sight of them.
EZE 12:8 And the word of the Lord was made early to me, and he said,
EZE 12:9 Son of man, whether the house of Israel, the house stirring me to wrath, said not to thee, What doest thou?
EZE 12:10 Say thou to them, The Lord God saith these things, This burden is on the duke, which is in Jerusalem, and on all the house of Israel, which is in the midst of them.
EZE 12:11 Say thou, I am your sign of thing to coming; as I did, so it shall be done to them; they shall go into passing over, and into captivity.
EZE 12:12 And the duke which is in the midst of them, shall be borne out on shoulders, and he shall go out in darkness; they shall dig through the wall, and lead him out; his face shall be covered, that he see not with eye the earth.
EZE 12:13 And I shall stretch forth my net on him, and he shall be taken in my net; and I shall lead him into Babylon, into the land of Chaldees, and he shall not see that land, and he shall die there.
EZE 12:14 And I shall scatter into each wind all men that be about him, his help, and his companies; and I shall draw out the sword after them.
EZE 12:15 And they shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall scatter them among heathen men, and shall sow them abroad in lands.
EZE 12:16 And I shall leave of them a few men from sword, and hunger, and pestilence, that they tell out all the great trespasses of them among heathen men, to whom they shall enter; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 12:17 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 12:18 Thou, son of man, eat thy bread in disturbing [[or troubling]], but also drink thy water in haste and mourning.
EZE 12:19 And thou shalt say to the people of the land, The Lord God saith these things to them that dwell in Jerusalem, and elsewhere in the land of Israel, They shall eat their bread in anguish, and they shall drink their water in desolation; that the land be desolate of his multitude, for the wickedness of all men that dwell therein.
EZE 12:20 And [[the]] cities that be now inhabited, shall be desolate, and the land shall be forsaken; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 12:21 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 12:22 Son of man, what is this proverb to you, of men saying in the land of Israel, Days shall be deferred into long time, and each vision shall perish?
EZE 12:23 Therefore say thou to them, The Lord God saith these things, I shall make this proverb to cease, and it shall no more be said commonly in Israel; and speak thou to them, that the days have nighed, and each word of vision, either of prophesy.
EZE 12:24 For why each vision shall no more be void, neither before-telling of thing to coming [[or divination]]shall be doubtful in the midst of the sons of Israel;
EZE 12:25 for I the Lord shall speak what-ever word I shall speak, and it shall be done; it shall no more be delayed, but in your days, ye house stirring to wrath, I shall speak a word, and I shall do that word, saith the Lord God.
EZE 12:26 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 12:27 Thou, son of man, lo! the house of Israel, of them that say, The vision which this man seeth, is into many days yet to come, and this man prophesieth into long times.
EZE 12:28 Therefore say thou to them, The Lord God saith these things, Each word of me shall no more be deferred; the word which I shall speak, shall be [[ful]] filled, saith the Lord God.
EZE 13:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 13:2 Son of man, prophesy thou to the prophets of Israel that prophesy; and thou shalt say to them that prophesy of their heart, Hear ye the word of the Lord.
EZE 13:3 The Lord God saith these things, Woe to the unwise prophets, that follow their spirit, and see nothing;
EZE 13:4 Israel, thy prophets were as foxes in desert[[s]].
EZE 13:5 Ye ascended not [[or went not up]] even against, neither again-setted [[or again-putted]] a wall for the house of Israel, that ye should stand in battle in the day of the Lord.
EZE 13:6 They see vain things, and divine a leasing, and say, The Lord saith, when the Lord sent not them; and they continued to confirm the word.
EZE 13:7 Whether ye saw not a vain vision, and spake false divining, and said, The Lord saith, when I spake not?
EZE 13:8 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, For ye spake vain things, and saw a leasing, therefore lo! I to you, saith the Lord God.
EZE 13:9 And mine hand shall be on the prophets that see vain things, and divine leasings; they shall not be in the counsels of my people, and they shall not be written in the scripture of the house of Israel, neither they shall enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord God.
EZE 13:10 For they deceived my people, and said, Peace, peace, and no peace is; and it builded a wall, but they pargeted it with fen without chaffs.
EZE 13:11 Say thou to them that parget without tempering, that it shall fall down; for a strong rain shall be overflowing, and I shall give full great stones falling from above, and I shall give a wind of tempest that destroyeth.
EZE 13:12 For lo! the wall fell down. Whether it shall not be said to you, Where is the pargeting, which ye pargeted?
EZE 13:13 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, And I shall make the spirit of tempests to break out in mine indignation, and [[a]] strong rain flowing in my strong vengeance shall be, and great hailstones in [[my]] wrath into wasting.
EZE 13:14 And I shall destroy the wall, which ye have pargeted without tempering, and I shall make it even with the earth; and the foundament thereof shall be showed, and it shall fall down, and it shall be wasted in the midst thereof; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 13:15 And I shall [[ful]] fill mine indignation in the wall, and in them that pargeted it without tempering; and I shall say to you, The wall is not, and they be not, that pargeted it,
EZE 13:16 that is, the prophets of Israel, that prophesy to Jerusalem, and see to it the vision of peace, and peace is not, saith the Lord God.
EZE 13:17 And thou, son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people, that prophesy of their heart; and prophesy thou on them,
EZE 13:18 and say thou, The Lord God saith these things, Woe to them that sew together cushions under each cubit of [[the]] hand, and make pillows under the head of each age, to take souls; and when they deceived the souls of my people, they quickened the souls of them.
EZE 13:19 And they defouled me to my people, for an handful of barley, and for a gobbet of bread, that they should slay souls that die not, and quicken souls that live not; and they lied to my people, believing to leasings.
EZE 13:20 For this thing the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I to your cushions, by which ye deceive souls flying; and I shall all-break those [[or them]] from your arms, and I shall deliver [[the]] souls which ye deceive, souls that ye make to fly.
EZE 13:21 And I shall all-break your pillows, and I shall deliver my people from your hand; and they shall no more be in your hands, to be robbed; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 13:22 For that that ye made falsely the heart of a just man to mourn, whom I made not sorry; and ye comforted the hands of a wicked man, that he should not turn again from his evil way, and live.
EZE 13:23 Therefore ye shall not see vain things, and ye shall no more divine false divinings; and I shall deliver my people from your hand, and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 14:1 And men of the elders of Israel came to me, and sat before me.
EZE 14:2 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 14:3 Son of man, these men have set [[or put]] their uncleannesses in their hearts, and have set steadfastly the cause of stumbling of their wickedness against their faces. Whether I that am asked, shall answer to them?
EZE 14:4 For this thing speak thou to them, and thou shalt say to them, These things saith the Lord God, A man, a man of the house of Israel, that setteth [[or hath put]] his uncleannesses in his heart, and setteth steadfastly the cause of stumbling of his wickedness against his face, and cometh to the prophet, and asketh me by him, I the Lord shall answer to him in the multitude of his uncleannesses;
EZE 14:5 that the house of Israel be taken in their heart, by which they went away from me in all their idols.
EZE 14:6 Therefore say thou to the house of Israel, The Lord God saith these things, Be ye converted, and go ye away from your idols, and turn away your faces from all your filths.
EZE 14:7 For why a man, a man of the house of Israel, and of converts, who-ever is a comeling in Israel, if he is alienated from me, and setteth [[or shall put]] his idols in his heart, and setteth steadfastly the cause of stumbling of his wickedness against his face, and he cometh to the prophet, to ask me by him, I the Lord shall answer him by myself.
EZE 14:8 And I shall set my face on that man, and I shall make him into ensample, and into a proverb, and I shall lose him from the midst of my people; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 14:9 And when a prophet erreth, and speaketh a word, I the Lord shall deceive that prophet; and I shall stretch forth mine hand [[up]] on him, and I shall do him away from the midst of my people Israel.
EZE 14:10 And they shall bear their wicked-ness; by the wickedness of the asker, so the wickedness of the prophet shall be;
EZE 14:11 that the house of Israel err no more from me, neither be defouled in all their trespassings; but that it be into a people to me, and I be into God to them, saith the Lord of hosts.
EZE 14:12 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 14:13 Son of man, when the land sinneth against me, that it trespassing do trespass, I shall stretch forth mine hand on it, and I shall all-break the staff of bread thereof; and I shall send hunger into it, and I shall slay of it man and beast.
EZE 14:14 And if these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, be in the midst thereof, they by their rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] shall deliver their souls, saith the Lord of hosts.
EZE 14:15 That if also I bring in worst beasts on the land, that I destroy it, and if it is without a way, for that no passer is for the beasts,
EZE 14:16 and these three men that be before-said, be therein, I live, saith the Lord God, for they shall neither deliver sons, neither daughters, but they alone shall be delivered; forsooth the land shall be made desolate.
EZE 14:17 Either if I bring in a sword on that land, and I say to the sword, Pass thou through the land, and I slay of it man and beast,
EZE 14:18 and these three men be in the midst thereof, I live, saith the Lord God, that they shall not deliver sons neither daughters, but they alone shall be delivered.
EZE 14:19 Forsooth if I bring in also pestilence on that land, and I shed out mine indignation on it in blood, that I do away from it man and beast,
EZE 14:20 and Noah, and Daniel, and Job, be in the midst thereof, I live, saith the Lord God, for they shall not deliver a son and a daughter, but they by their rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] shall deliver their souls.
EZE 14:21 For the Lord God saith these things, That though I send in my four worst dooms, sword, and hunger, and evil beasts, and pestilence, into Jeru-salem, that I slay of it man and beast,
EZE 14:22 nevertheless salvation of them that led out sons and daughters, shall be left therein. Lo! they shall go out to you, and ye shall see the way of them, and the findings of them; and ye shall be comforted on the evil, which I brought in on Jerusalem, in all things which I bare in on it.
EZE 14:23 And they shall comfort you, when ye shall see the way of them, and the findings of them; and ye shall know, that not in vain I did all things, whatever things I did therein, saith the Lord Almighty.
EZE 15:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 15:2 Son of man, what shall be done to the tree of a vine, of all the trees of woods, that be among the trees of woods?
EZE 15:3 Whether tree, or timber, shall be taken thereof, that work be made? either shall a stake be made thereof, that any vessel hang thereon?
EZE 15:4 Lo! it is given [[to the fire]] into meat; [[the]] fire wasted ever either part thereof, and the midst thereof is driven into a dead spark; whether it shall be profitable to work?
EZE 15:5 Yea, when it was whole, it was not covenable to work; how much more when fire hath devoured, and hath burnt it, nothing of work shall be made thereof?
EZE 15:6 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, As the tree of a vine is among the trees of woods, which I gave to fire to devour, so I gave the dwellers of Jerusalem,
EZE 15:7 and I shall set my face against them. They shall go out of the fire, and then another fire shall waste them; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall set my face against them,
EZE 15:8 and shall give the land without a way and desolate, for they were trespassers, saith the Lord God.
EZE 16:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 16:2 Son of man, make known to Jerusalem their abominations;
EZE 16:3 and thou shalt say, The Lord God saith these things. A! thou Jerusalem, thy root and thy generation is of the land of Canaan; thy father is Amorite, and thy mother is Hittite.
EZE 16:4 And when thou were born, thy navel was not cut away in the day of thy birth, and thou were not washed in water into health, neither salted with salt, neither wrapped in swaddling clothes.
EZE 16:5 An eye spared not on thee, that it having mercy on thee, did to thee one of these things; but thou were cast forth on the face of earth, in the casting out of thy soul, in the day in which thou were born.
EZE 16:6 Forsooth I passed by thee, and I saw thee defouled in thy blood; and I said to thee, when thou were in thy blood, Live thou; soothly I said to thee in thy blood, Live thou.
EZE 16:7 I gave thee multiplied as the seed of a field, and thou were multiplied, and made great; and thou enteredest, and camest fully to women’s adorning; thy teats waxed great, and thine hair waxed; and thou were naked, and full of shame.
EZE 16:8 And I passed by thee, and I saw thee, and lo! thy time, the time of lovers; and I spreaded abroad my clothing on thee, and I covered thy shame. And I swore to thee, and I made a covenant with thee, saith the Lord God, and thou were made a wife to me.
EZE 16:9 And I washed thee in water, and I cleansed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.
EZE 16:10 And I clothed thee with clothes of diverse colours, and I shodded thee in jacinth, and I girded thee with bis, [[or white silk]];
EZE 16:11 and I clothed thee with subtle things, and I adorned thee with ornament[[s]]. And I gave bands in thine hands, and a wreath about thy neck;
EZE 16:12 and I gave a ring on thy mouth, and circles to thine ears, and a crown of fairness in thine head.
EZE 16:13 And thou were adorned with gold and silver, and thou were clothed with bis, and ray-cloth with round images, and many colours. Thou atest clean flour of wheat, and honey, and oil, and thou were made fair full greatly; and thou increasedest into a realm,
EZE 16:14 and thy name went out into heathen men for thy fairness; for thou were perfect in my fairness which I had set [[or put] [up]] on thee, saith the Lord God.
EZE 16:15 And thou haddest trust in thy fairness, and didest fornication in thy name; and thou settedest [[or hast put]] forth thy fornication to each that passed forth, that thou shouldest be made his.
EZE 16:16 And thou tookest of my clothes, and madest to thee high things set about on each side; and thou didest fornication on those [[or them]], as it was not done, neither shall be done.
EZE 16:17 And thou tookest the vessels of thy fairness, of my gold and of my silver, which I gave to thee; and thou madest to thee images of men, and didest fornication in those [[or them]].
EZE 16:18 And thou tookest thy clothes of many colours, and thou were clothed in those [[or them]]; and thou settedest mine oil and mine incense in the sight of those [[or them]].
EZE 16:19 And thou settedest my bread, which I gave to thee, flour of wheat, and oil, and honey, by which I nourished thee, in the sight of those [[or them]], into an odour of sweetness; and it was done, saith the Lord God.
EZE 16:20 And thou tookest thy sons and thy daughters, which thou engenderedest to me, and offeredest to those idols, for to be devoured. Whether thy fornication is little?
EZE 16:21 Thou offeredest my sons, and gavest them, and hallowedest to those idols.
EZE 16:22 And after all thine abominations and fornications, thou bethoughtest not on the days of thy young waxing age, when thou were naked, and full of shame, and were defouled in thy blood.
EZE 16:23 And after all thy malice, woe, woe befell to thee, saith the Lord God.
EZE 16:24 And thou buildedest to thee a bordello house, and madest to thee a place of whoredom in all streets.
EZE 16:25 At each head of the way thou buildedest a sign of thine whoredom, and madest thy fairness abominable; and thou partedest thy feet to each man passing forth, and multipliedest thy fornications.
EZE 16:26 And thou didest fornication with the sons of Egypt, thy neighbours of great fleshes, and thou multipliedest thy fornications, to stir me to wrath.
EZE 16:27 Lo! I shall stretch forth mine hand on thee, and I shall take away thy justifying; and I shall give thee into the souls of them that hate thee, of the daughters of Palestines, that be ashamed in thy way full of great trespass.
EZE 16:28 And thou didest fornication with the sons of Assyrians, for thou were not [[ful]] filled yet; and after that thou didest fornication, neither so thou were [[ful]] filled.
EZE 16:29 And thou multipliedest thy fornication in the land of Canaan with Chaldees, and neither so thou were [[ful]] filled.
EZE 16:30 In what thing shall I cleanse thine heart, saith the Lord God, when thou doest all these works of a woman, an whore, and greedy asker [[or and bold to whoredom]]?
EZE 16:31 For thou madest thy bordello house in the head of each way, and thou madest thine high place in each street; and thou were not made as an whore full of annoying, increasing price,
EZE 16:32 but as a woman adulteress, that bringeth in aliens on her husband.
EZE 16:33 Hires be given to all whores, but thou hast given hire, [[or meed]], to all thy lovers; and thou gavest to them, that they should enter to thee on each side, to do fornication with thee.
EZE 16:34 And it was done in thee against the custom of women in thy fornications, and fornication shall not be after thee; for in that that thou gavest hires, and tookest not hires, the contrary was done in thee.
EZE 16:35 Therefore, thou whore, hear the word of the Lord.
EZE 16:36 The Lord God saith these things, For thy riches is shed out, and thy shame is showed in thy fornications on thy lovers, and on the idols of thine abominations, in the blood of thy sons, which thou gavest to them;
EZE 16:37 lo! I shall gather together all thy lovers, with which thou were meddled [[or mingled]]together, and all men which thou lovedest, with all men which thou hatedest; and I shall gather them on thee on each side, and I shall make naked thy shame before them, and they shall see all thy filthhood.
EZE 16:38 And I shall deem thee by the dooms of adulteresses, and shedding out blood; and I shall give thee into the blood of strong vengeance, and of fervor.
EZE 16:39 And I shall give thee into the hands of them, and they shall destroy thy bordello house, and they shall destroy the place of thine whoredom; and they shall make thee naked of thy clothes, and they shall take away the vessels of thy fairness, and they shall forsake thee naked, and full of shame.
EZE 16:40 And they shall bring on thee a multitude, and they shall stone thee with stones, and they shall slay thee with their swords.
EZE 16:41 And they shall burn thine houses with fire, and they shall make dooms in thee, before the eyes of full many women; and thou shalt cease to do fornication, and thou shalt no more give hires.
EZE 16:42 And mine indignation shall rest in thee, and my fervent love shall be taken away from thee; and I shall rest, and I shall no more be wroth,
EZE 16:43 for thou haddest not mind on the days of thy young waxing age, and thou stirredest me to ire in all these things. Wherefore and I gave thy ways in thine head, saith the Lord God, and I did not after thy great trespasses, in all these thine abominations.
EZE 16:44 Lo! each man that saith a proverb commonly, shall take it in thee, and shall say, As the mother, so and the daughter of her.
EZE 16:45 Thou art the daughter of thy mother, that casted away her husband and her sons; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, that casted away their husbands and their sons. Thy mother is Hittite, and thy father is Amorite;
EZE 16:46 and thy greater sister is Samaria, she and her daughters, that dwell at thy left side; but thy sister less than thou, that dwelleth at thy right side, is Sodom, and her daughters.
EZE 16:47 But thou wentest not in the ways of them, neither thou didest after the great trespasses of them; hast thou done almost a little less curseder deeds than they, in all thy ways?
EZE 16:48 Yea, as I live, saith the Lord God, for Sodom, thy sister, did not, she and her daughters, as thou didest, and thy daughters.
EZE 16:49 Lo! this was the wickedness of Sodom, thy sister, pride, fullness of bread, and abundance, and idleness of her, and of her daughters; and they putted not hand to a needy man and poor.
EZE 16:50 And they were enhanced, and did other abominations before me; and I took them away, as thou hast seen.
EZE 16:51 And Samaria sinned not the half of thy sins, but thou hast overcome them in thy great trespasses; and thou hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations, which thou wroughtest.
EZE 16:52 Therefore and thou bear thy shame, that hast overcome thy sisters with thy sins, and didest more cursedly than they; for they be justified of thee. Therefore and be thou shamed, and bear thy shame, which hast justified thy sisters.
EZE 16:53 And I shall convert and restore them by the conversion of Sodom with her daughters, and by the conversion of Samaria and of her daughters; and I shall convert thy turning again in the midst of them,
EZE 16:54 that thou bear thy shame, and be shamed in all things which thou didest, comforting them.
EZE 16:55 And thy sister Sodom and her daughters shall turn again to their eldness [[or oldness]]or old ways; and Samaria and her daughters shall turn again to their eldness; and thou and thy daughters turn again to your eld-ness.
EZE 16:56 Forsooth Sodom, thy sister, was not heard in thy mouth, in the day of thy pride,
EZE 16:57 before that thy malice was showed, as in this time, into shame of the daughters of Syria, and all daughters in thy compass, of the daughters of Palestines, that be about thee by compass.
EZE 16:58 Thou hast borne thy great trespass, and thy shame, saith the Lord God.
EZE 16:59 For the Lord God saith these things, And I shall do to thee as thou despisedest the oath, that thou shouldest make void the covenant;
EZE 16:60 and I shall have mind on my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I shall raise to thee a covenant everlasting.
EZE 16:61 And thou shalt have mind on thy ways, and shalt be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters greater than thou, with thy less sisters; and I shall give them into daughters to thee, but not of thy covenant.
EZE 16:62 And I shall raise, or establish, my covenant with thee, and thou shalt know, that I am the Lord,
EZE 16:63 that thou have mind, and be ashamed; and that it be no more to thee to open the mouth for thy shame, when I shall be pleased to thee in all things which thou didest, saith the Lord God.
EZE 17:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 17:2 Son of man, set forth a dark speech, and tell thou a parable to the house of Israel;
EZE 17:3 and thou shalt say, The Lord God saith these things. A great eagle of great wings, with long stretching out of members, full of feathers and of diversity, came to the Lebanon, and took away the marrow of the cedar.
EZE 17:4 He pulled away the highness of boughs thereof, and bare it over into the land of Canaan, and setted it in the city of merchants.
EZE 17:5 And he took of the seed of the land, and setted it in the land for seed, that it should make steadfast root on many waters; and he setted it in the higher part.
EZE 17:6 And when it had grown, it increased into a larger vinery [[or a broad vineyard]], in low stature; for the boughs thereof beheld to that eagle, and the roots thereof were under that eagle; therefore it was made a vinery [[or vineyard]], and it made fruit into scions, and sent out boughs.
EZE 17:7 And another great eagle was made, with great wings, and many feathers; and lo! this vinery [[or this vineyard]] as sending his roots to that eagle, stretched forth his scions to that eagle, that he should moist it out of the cornfloors of his seed.
EZE 17:8 Which is planted in a good land on many waters, that it make boughs, and bear fruit, that it be into a great vinery [[or vineyard]].
EZE 17:9 Say thou, Ezekiel, The Lord God saith these things, Therefore whether he shall have prosperity? Whether Nebuchadnezzar shall not pull away the roots of him, and shall constrain the fruits of him? And he shall make dry all the scions of burgeoning thereof, and it shall be dry; and not in great arm, neither in much people, that he should draw it out by the roots.
EZE 17:10 Lo! it is planted, therefore whether it shall have prosperity? Whether not when burning wind shall touch it, it shall be made dry, and shall wax dry in the cornfloors of his seed?
EZE 17:11 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 17:12 Say thou to the house of Israel stirring me to wrath, Know ye not what these things signify? Say thou, Lo! the king of Babylon cometh into Jerusalem; and he shall take the king and the princes thereof, and he shall lead them to himself into Babylon.
EZE 17:13 And he shall take of the seed of the realm, and shall smite with it a bond of peace, and he shall take of it an oath; but also he shall take away the strong men of the land,
EZE 17:14 that it be a meek realm, and be not raised [[up]], but that it keep the covenant of him, and hold it.
EZE 17:15 Which went away from him, and sent messengers into Egypt, that it should give to him horses and much people. Whether he that did these things, shall have prosperity, either shall get health? and whether he that breaketh [[a]] covenant, shall escape?
EZE 17:16 I live, saith the Lord God, for in the place of the king that made him king, whose oath he made void, and brake the covenant, which he had with him, in the midst of Babylon he shall die.
EZE 17:17 And not in great host, neither in much people, Pharaoh shall make battle against him, in the casting up of [[an heap of]] earth, and in building of pales or posts, that he slay many persons.
EZE 17:18 For he despised the oath, that he should break the bond of peace, and lo! he gave his hand; and when he hath done all these things, he shall not escape.
EZE 17:19 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, I live, for I shall set [[or put]] on his head the oath which he despised, and the bond of peace which he brake.
EZE 17:20 And I shall spread abroad my net [[up]] on him, and he shall be taken in my net, and I shall bring him into Babylon; and there I shall deem him in the trespassing, by which he despised me.
EZE 17:21 And all his fleers-away with all his company shall fall down by sword, forsooth the remnants shall be scattered into each wind; and ye shall know, that I the Lord spake.
EZE 17:22 The Lord God saith these things, And I shall take of the marrow of an high cedar, and I shall set a tender thing of the cop [[or top]] of his branches; I shall constrain, and I shall plant it on an high hill, and appearing far off.
EZE 17:23 In the high hill of Israel I shall plant it; and it shall break out into burgeoning, and it shall make fruit, and it shall be into a great cedar, and all birds shall dwell under it; each volatile shall make nest under the shadow of his boughs.
EZE 17:24 And all [[the]] trees of the country shall know, that I am the Lord; I made low the high tree, and I enhanced the low tree, and I made dry the green tree, and I made the dry tree to bring forth boughs; I the Lord have spoken, and I have done.
EZE 18:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 18:2 What is it, that ye turn a parable among you into this proverb, in the land of Israel, and say, [[The]] Fathers ate a bitter grape, and the teeth of sons be on edge, either astonied?
EZE 18:3 I live, saith the Lord God, this parable shall no more be into a proverb to you in Israel.
EZE 18:4 Lo! all souls be mine; as the soul of the father, so and the soul of the son is mine. That soul that doeth sin, shall die.
EZE 18:5 And if a man is just, and doeth doom and rightfulness,
EZE 18:6 eateth not in [[the]] hills, and raiseth not his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel; and defouleth not the wife of his neighbour, and nigheth not to a woman defouled with unclean blood;
EZE 18:7 and maketh not a man sorry, yieldeth the wed to the debtor, ravisheth nothing by violence, giveth his bread to the hungry, and covereth a naked man with a cloth;
EZE 18:8 lendeth not to usury, and taketh not more; turneth away his hand from wickedness, and maketh true doom betwixt man and man;
EZE 18:9 and goeth in my commandments, and keepeth my dooms, that he do truth; this is a just man, he shall live in life, saith the Lord God.
EZE 18:10 That if he engendereth a son, a thief, shedding out blood, and doeth one of these things,
EZE 18:11 and soothly not doing all these things, but eating in hills, and defouling the wife of his neighbour;
EZE 18:12 making sorrowful a needy man and poor, ravishing ravens, not yielding a wed, raising his eyes to idols, doing abomination;
EZE 18:13 giving to usury, and taking more; whether he shall live? he shall not live; when he hath done all these abominable things, he shall die by death, his blood shall be in him.
EZE 18:14 That if he begetteth a son, which seeth all the sins of his father, which he did, and dreadeth, and doeth none like those [[or them]];
EZE 18:15 eateth not on hills, and raiseth not his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel; and defouleth not the wife of his neighbour,
EZE 18:16 and maketh not sorry a man, withholdeth not a wed, and ravisheth not raven, giveth his bread to the hungry, and covereth the naked with a cloth;
EZE 18:17 turneth away his hand from the wrong of a poor man, taketh not usury and overabundance, that is, nothing more than he lent, and doeth my dooms, and goeth in my commandments; this son shall not die in the wickedness of his father, but he shall live in life.
EZE 18:18 For his father made false challenge, and did violence to his brother, and wrought evil in the midst of his people, lo! he is dead in his wickedness.
EZE 18:19 And ye say, Why beareth not the son the wickedness of the father? That is to say, for the son wrought doom and rightfulness, he kept all my commandments, and did those [[or them]], he shall live in life.
EZE 18:20 That soul that doeth sin, shall die; the son shall not bear the wickedness of the father, and the father shall not bear the wickedness of the son; the rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] of a just man shall be on him, and the wicked-ness of a wicked man shall be on him.
EZE 18:21 Forsooth if a wicked man doeth penance of all his sins which he wrought, and keepeth all my behests, and doeth doom and rightfulness, he shall live by life, and shall not die.
EZE 18:22 I shall not have mind of all his wickednesses which he wrought; he shall live in his rightfulness [[or right-wiseness]] which he wrought.
EZE 18:23 Whether the death of the wicked man is of my will, saith the Lord God, and not that he be converted from his ways, and live?
EZE 18:24 Forsooth if a just man turneth away himself from his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], and doeth wickedness by all his abominations, which a wicked man is wont to work, whether he shall live? All his rightfulnesses [[or rightwisenesses]] which he did, shall not be had in mind; in his trespassing by which he trespassed, and in his sin which he sinned, he shall die in those [[or them]].
EZE 18:25 And ye said, The way of the Lord is not even. Therefore, the house of Israel, hear ye, whether my way is not even, and not more, your ways be shrewd?
EZE 18:26 For when a rightful man turneth away himself from his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], and doeth wickedness, he shall die in it; he shall die in the unrightfulness [[or unrightwiseness]] which he wrought.
EZE 18:27 And when a wicked man turneth away himself from his wickedness which he wrought, and doeth doom and rightfulness, he shall quicken his soul.
EZE 18:28 For he beholding and turning away himself from all his wicked-nesses which he wrought, [[he]] shall live in life, and shall not die.
EZE 18:29 And the sons of Israel say, The way of the Lord is not even. Whether my ways be not even, ye house of Israel, and not more, your ways be shrewd?
EZE 18:30 Therefore, thou house of Israel, I shall deem each man by his ways, saith the Lord God. Turn ye altogether, and do ye penance for all your wickednesses, and wickedness shall not be to you into falling.
EZE 18:31 Cast away from you all your trespassings, by which ye trespassed, and make ye a new heart and a new spirit to you, and then why shall ye die, the house of Israel?
EZE 18:32 For I desire not the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God; turn ye again, and live ye.
EZE 19:1 And thou, son of man, take wailing on the princes of Israel;
EZE 19:2 and thou shalt say, Why thy mother, a lioness, lay among lions? In the midst of little lions she nourished her whelps,
EZE 19:3 and led out one of her little lions; he was made a lion, and he learned to take prey, and to eat men.
EZE 19:4 And heathen men heard of him, and took him not without their wounds; and they brought him in chains into the land of Egypt.
EZE 19:5 Which mother when she had seen, that she was sick, and the abiding of him perished, took another one of her little lions, and made him a lion.
EZE 19:6 Which went among lions, and was made like a young lion; and [[he]] learned to take prey, and to devour men.
EZE 19:7 He learned to make widows, and to bring the cities of men into desert; and the land and the fullness thereof was made desolate, of the voice of his roaring.
EZE 19:8 And heathen men came together against him on each side from provinces, and spread on him their net; he was taken in the wounds of those heathen men.
EZE 19:9 And they sent him into a cave in chains, and brought him to the king of Babylon; and they sent him into prison, that his voice were no more heard on the hills of Israel.
EZE 19:10 Thy mother as a vinery [[or vine-yard]] in thy blood was planted on water; the fruits thereof and the boughs thereof increased by reason of many waters.
EZE 19:11 And firm rods were made to it into sceptres of lords, and the stature thereof was enhanced among boughs; and it saw his highness in the multitude of his scions.
EZE 19:12 And it was drawn out in wrath, and was cast forth into [[the]] earth; and a burning wind dried the fruit thereof, and the rods of strength thereof withered, and were made dry, and the fire ate it.
EZE 19:13 And now it is planted over in desert, in a land without a way, and thirsty.
EZE 19:14 And fire went out of a rod of the branches thereof, that ate the fruit thereof. And a strong rod, the sceptre of lords, was not in it. It is wailing, and it shall be into wailing.
EZE 20:1 And it was done in the seventh year, in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, men of the elders of Israel came to ask the Lord; and they sat before me.
EZE 20:2 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 20:3 Son of man, speak thou to the elder men of Israel; and thou shalt say to them, The Lord God saith these things, Whether ye came to ask me? I live, for I shall not answer to you, saith the Lord God.
EZE 20:4 Son of man, if thou deemest them, if thou deemest, show thou to them the abominations of their fathers.
EZE 20:5 And thou shalt say to them, The Lord God saith these things, In the day in which I chose Israel, and raised mine hand for the generation of the house of Jacob, and I appeared to them in the land of Egypt, and I raised mine hand for them, and I said, I am your Lord God,
EZE 20:6 in that day I raised mine hand for them, that I should lead them out of the land of Egypt, into the land which I had purveyed for them, a land flowing with milk and honey, which is noble among all lands.
EZE 20:7 And I said to them, Each man cast away the offences of his eyes, and do not ye be defouled in the idols of Egypt; I am your Lord God.
EZE 20:8 And they stirred me to wrath, and would not hear me; each man casted not away the abominations of his eyes, neither they forsook the idols of Egypt. And I said, that I would shed out mine indignation on them, and [[ful]] fill my wrath in them, in the midst of the land of Egypt.
EZE 20:9 And I did for my name, that it should not be defouled before heathen men, in the midst of whom they were, and among whom I appeared to them, that I should lead them out of the land of Egypt.
EZE 20:10 Therefore I casted them out of the land of Egypt, and I led them out into desert;
EZE 20:11 and I gave to them my command-ments, and I showed to them my dooms, which a man shall do, and live in those [[or them]].
EZE 20:12 Furthermore and I gave to them my sabbaths, that it should be a sign betwixt me and them, and that they should know, that I am the Lord hallowing them.
EZE 20:13 And the house of Israel stirred me to wrath in desert; they went not in my commandments, and they casted away my dooms, which a man that doeth, shall live in those [[or them]]; and they defouled greatly my sabbaths. Therefore I said, that I would shed out my strong vengeance on them in desert, and waste them;
EZE 20:14 and I did for my name, lest it were defouled before heathen men, from whom I casted them out in the sight of those [[or them]].
EZE 20:15 Therefore I raised mine hand on them in the desert, that I brought not them into the land which I gave to them, the land flowing with milk and honey, the best of all lands.
EZE 20:16 For they casted away my dooms, and went not in my commandments, and they defouled my sabbaths; for the heart of them went after idols.
EZE 20:17 And mine eyes spared on them, that I killed not them, neither I wasted them in the desert.
EZE 20:18 Forsooth I said to the sons of them in wilderness, Do no ye go in the commandments of your fathers, neither keep ye the dooms of them, neither be ye defouled in the idols of them.
EZE 20:19 I am your Lord God, go ye in my commandments, and keep ye my dooms, and do ye those [[or them]].
EZE 20:20 And hallow ye my sabbaths, that it be a sign betwixt me and you, and that it be known, that I am your Lord God.
EZE 20:21 And the sons stirred me to wrath, and went not in my commandments, and kept not my dooms, that they did those [[or them]], which when a man hath done, he shall live in those [[or them]], and they defouled my sabbaths. And I menaced to [[or threatened]] them that I would shed out my strong vengeance on them, and [[ful]] fill my wrath in them in the desert.
EZE 20:22 But I turned away mine hand, and I did this for my name, that it were not defouled before heathen men, from which I casted them out before the eyes of those [[or them]].
EZE 20:23 Again I raised mine hand against them in wilderness, that I should scatter them into nations, and winnow them into other lands;
EZE 20:24 for that that they had not done my dooms, and had reproved my commandments, and had defouled my sabbaths, and their eyes had been longing after the idols of their fathers.
EZE 20:25 Therefore and I gave to them commandments not good, and dooms in which they shall not live.
EZE 20:26 And I defouled them in their gifts, when they offered to me for their trespasses all thing that openeth the womb; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 20:27 Wherefore speak thou, son of man, to the house of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, The Lord God saith these things, Yet and in this your fathers blasphemed me, when they despising had forsaken me,
EZE 20:28 and I had brought them into the land on which I raised mine hand, that I should give [[it]] to them, they saw each high little hill, and each tree full of boughs, and they offered there their sacrifices, and they gave there their offerings, into stirring me to wrath; and they set [[or put]] there the odour of their sweetness, and they offered their moist sacrifices.
EZE 20:29 And I said to them, What is the high thing, to which ye enter? And the name thereof is called High Thing till to this day.
EZE 20:30 Therefore say thou to the house of Israel, The Lord God saith these things, Certainly ye be defouled in the way of your fathers, and ye do fornication after the offendings of them,
EZE 20:31 and in the offering of your gifts, when ye led over your sons by fire, ye be defouled in all your idols till today, and shall I answer to you, the house of Israel? I live, saith the Lord God, for I shall not answer to you;
EZE 20:32 neither the thought of your soul shall be done, that say, We shall be as heathen men, and as [[the]] nations of earth, that we worship trees and stones.
EZE 20:33 I live, saith the Lord God, for in strong hand, and in arm stretched forth, and in strong vengeance shed out, I shall reign [[up]] on you.
EZE 20:34 And I shall lead out you from peoples, and I shall gather you from lands, in which ye be scattered; in strong hand, and in arm stretched forth, and in strong vengeance shed out I shall reign on you.
EZE 20:35 And I shall bring you into desert of peoples, and I shall be deemed there with you face to face.
EZE 20:36 As I strived in doom against your fathers in the desert of the land of Egypt, so I shall deem you, saith the Lord;
EZE 20:37 and I shall make you subject to my sceptre, and I shall bring in you in the bonds of peace.
EZE 20:38 And I shall choose of you trespassers, and wicked men; and I shall lead them out of the land of their dwelling, and they shall not enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 20:39 And ye, the house of Israel, the Lord God saith these things, Go ye each man after your idols, and serve ye those [[or them]]. That and if ye hear not me in this, and defoul more mine holy name in your gifts, and in your idols,
EZE 20:40 in mine holy hill, in the high hill of Israel, saith the Lord God, ye shall be punished grievouslier. There all the house of Israel shall serve me, soothly all men in the land, in which they shall please me; and there I shall seek your first fruits, and the beginning of your tithes in all your hallowings.
EZE 20:41 I shall receive you into odour of sweetness, when I shall lead you out of peoples, and shall gather you from lands, in which ye were scattered; and I shall be hallowed in you before the eyes of the nations.
EZE 20:42 And ye shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the land for which I raised mine hand, that I should give it to your fathers.
EZE 20:43 And ye shall have mind there on your ways, and on all your great trespasses, by which ye be defouled in those [[or them]]; and ye shall displease you in your sight, in all your malices which ye did.
EZE 20:44 And ye shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall do well to you for my name; not by your evil ways, neither by your worst trespasses, ye house of Israel, saith the Lord God.
EZE 20:45 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 20:46 Thou, son of man, set thy face against the way of the south, and drop thou thy word to the south, and prophesy thou to the forest of the midday, [[or south]], field.
EZE 20:47 And thou shalt say to the midday, [[or south]], forest, Hear thou the word of the Lord. The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall kindle a fire in thee, and I shall burn in thee each green tree, and each dry tree; the flame of burning shall not be quenched, and each face shall be burnt therein, from the south till to the north.
EZE 20:48 And each man shall see, that I the Lord have kindled it, and it shall not be quenched.
EZE 20:49 And I said, A! A! A! Lord God, they say of me, Whether this man speaketh not by parables?
EZE 21:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 21:2 Thou, son of man, set thy face to Jerusalem, and drop thou thy word to the saintuaries, and prophesy thou against the earth of Israel.
EZE 21:3 And thou shalt say to the land of Israel, The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I to thee, and I shall cast my sword out of his sheath, and I shall slay in thee a just man and a wicked man.
EZE 21:4 Forsooth for that that I have slain in thee a just man and a wicked man, therefore my sword shall go out of his sheath to each man, from the south till to the north;
EZE 21:5 that each man know, that I the Lord have drawn out my sword from his sheath, that shall not be called again.
EZE 21:6 And thou, son of man, wail in [[the]] sorrow of loins, and in bitter-nesses thou shalt wail before them.
EZE 21:7 And when they shall say to thee, Why wailest thou? thou shalt say, For [[the]] hearing, for it cometh; and each heart shall fail, and all hands shall be made numb, and each spirit shall be feeble, and waters shall flow down by all knees; lo! it cometh, and it shall be done, saith the Lord God.
EZE 21:8 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 21:9 Son of man, prophesy thou; and thou shalt say, The Lord God saith these things, Speak thou, The sword, the sword is made sharp, and is made bright;
EZE 21:10 it is made sharp to slay sacrifices; it is made bright, that it shine. Thou that movest the sceptre of my son, hast cut down each tree.
EZE 21:11 And I gave it to be furbished, that it be holden with hand; this sword is made sharp, and this is made bright, that it be in the hand of the slayer.
EZE 21:12 Son of man, cry thou, and yell, for this sword is made in my people, this in all the dukes of Israel; they that fled be given to sword with my people. Therefore smite thou on thine hip,
EZE 21:13 for it is proved; and this when it hath destroyed the sceptre, and it shall not be, saith the Lord God.
EZE 21:14 Therefore, son of man, prophesy thou, and smite thou hand to hand, and the sword be doubled, and the sword of the slayers be trebled; this is the sword of great slaying, that shall make them astonied, and to fail in heart, and multiplieth fallings.
EZE 21:15 In all the gates of them I gave troubling of a sword, sharp and made bright to shine, girded to slaying.
EZE 21:16 Be thou made sharp, go thou to the right side, either to the left side, whither ever the desire of thy face is.
EZE 21:17 Certainly and I shall smite with hand to hand, and I shall [[ful]] fill mine indignation; I the Lord spake.
EZE 21:18 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 21:19 And thou, son of man, set to thee two ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon come; both shall go out of one land, and by the hand he shall take conjecturing; he shall conjecture in the head of the way of the city,
EZE 21:20 setting a way, that the sword come to Rabbath of the sons of Ammon, and to Judah into Jerusalem most strong.
EZE 21:21 For the king of Babylon stood in the meeting of two ways, in the head of two ways, and sought divining, and meddled [[or mingled]] arrows; he asked idols, and took counsel at entrails.
EZE 21:22 Divining was made to his right side on Jerusalem, that he set engines, that he open [[the]] mouth in slaying, that he raise [[the]] voice in yelling, that he set engines against the gates, that he bear together [[an heap of]] earth, that he build strongholds.
EZE 21:23 And he shall be as counselling in a vain god’s answer before the eyes of them, and serving on the rest of sabbaths; but he shall have mind on their wickedness, to take them.
EZE 21:24 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, For that that ye had mind on your wickednesses, and showed your trespassings, and your sins appeared in all your thoughts, forsooth for that that ye had mind, ye shall be taken by the enemies’ hand.
EZE 21:25 But thou, cursed wicked duke of Israel, whose day before-determined is come in the time of wickedness,
EZE 21:26 the Lord God saith these things, Do away the mitre, take away the crown; whether it is not this that raised the meek man, and made low the high man?
EZE 21:27 Wickedness, wickedness, wicked-ness, I shall put it; and this shall not be done till he come, whose the doom it is, and I shall betake it to him.
EZE 21:28 And thou, son of man, prophesy, and say, The Lord God saith these things to the sons of Ammon, and to the shame of them; and thou shalt say, A! thou sword, A! thou sword, drawn out to slay, made bright, that thou slay and shine,
EZE 21:29 when vain things were seen to thee, and leasings were divined, that thou shouldest be given on the necks of wicked men wounded, the day of which before-determined shall come in the time of wickedness,
EZE 21:30 turn thou again into thy sheath, into the place in which thou were made. I shall deem thee in the land of thy birth,
EZE 21:31 and I shall shed out mine indignation on thee; in the fire of my strong vengeance I shall blow in thee, and I shall give thee into the hands of unwise men, and making death.
EZE 21:32 Thou shalt be meat to fire, thy blood shall be in the midst of earth; thou shalt be given to forgetting, for I the Lord spake.
EZE 22:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 22:2 And thou, son of man, whether thou deemest not the city of bloods? And thou shalt show to it all his abominations,
EZE 22:3 and thou shalt say, The Lord God saith these things, This is a city shedding out blood in the midst of itself, that the time thereof come; and which made idols against itself, that it should be defouled.
EZE 22:4 In thy blood which is shed out of thee, thou trespassedest, and thou art defouled in thine idols which thou madest; and thou madest thy days to nigh, and thou broughtest the time of thy years. Therefore I gave thee to be a shame to heathen men, and a scorning to all lands
EZE 22:5 that be nigh thee, and that be far from thee; thou foul city, noble, great in perishing, they shall have victory of thee.
EZE 22:6 Lo! [[the]] princes of Israel, all in their arm, were in thee, to shed out blood.
EZE 22:7 They punished with wrongs [[the]] father and mother in thee, they challenged falsely a comeling in the midst of thee, they made sorry a fatherless child, and a widow at thee.
EZE 22:8 Ye despised my saintuaries, and ye defouled my sabbaths.
EZE 22:9 Men backbiters were in thee, to shed out blood, and eat on hills [[or mountains]] in thee; they wrought great trespass in the midst of thee.
EZE 22:10 They uncovered the shamefuller things of the father[[s]] in thee, they made low in thee the uncleanness of a woman in unclean blood.
EZE 22:11 And each man wrought abomin-ation against the wife of his neigh-bour, and the father of the husband defouled his son’s wife unleavefully; a brother oppressed in thee his sister, the daughter of his father.
EZE 22:12 They took gifts of thee, to shed out blood; thou tookest usury and over-abundance, and thou challengedest greedily thy neighbours, and thou hast forgotten me, saith the Lord God.
EZE 22:13 Lo! I have smitten together mine hands on thine avarice, [[or greediness]], which thou didest, and on the blood which is shed out in the midst of thee.
EZE 22:14 Whether thine heart shall sustain, either thine hands shall have power, in the days which I shall make to thee? For I the Lord spake, and I shall do.
EZE 22:15 And I shall scatter thee into nations, and I shall winnow, [[or blow]], thee into other lands; and I shall make thine uncleanness to fail from thee,
EZE 22:16 and I shall wield thee in the sight of heathen men; and thou shalt know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 22:17 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 22:18 Thou, son of man, the house of Israel is turned to me into dross, either filth of iron; all these be brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of a furnace; they be made the dross of silver.
EZE 22:19 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, For that all ye be turned into dross, lo! I shall gather you together in the midst of Jerusalem,
EZE 22:20 by the gathering together of silver, and of latten, and of iron, and of tin, and of lead, in the midst of a furnace; and I shall kindle therein a fire, to well together; so I shall gather you together in my strong vengeance, and in my wrath, and I shall rest. And I shall well you together,
EZE 22:21 and I shall gather you together, and I shall set you afire in the fire of my strong vengeance, and ye shall be welled together in the midst thereof.
EZE 22:22 As silver is welled together in the midst of a furnace, so ye shall be in the midst thereof; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord, when I have shed out mine indignation [[up]] on you.
EZE 22:23 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 22:24 Son of man, say thou to it, Thou art a land unclean, and not berained in the day of strong vengeance.
EZE 22:25 Swearing together, either conspiring, of prophets is in the midst thereof; as a lion roaring and taking prey, they devoured men, they took riches, and price; they multiplied widows thereof in the midst thereof.
EZE 22:26 [[The]] Priests thereof despised my law, and defouled my saintuaries; they had not difference betwixt holy thing and unholy, they understood not betwixt defouled thing and clean thing; and they turned away their eyes from my sabbaths, and I was defouled in the midst of them.
EZE 22:27 The princes thereof in the midst thereof were as wolves ravishing prey, to shed out blood, and to lose men, and in following lucres greedily.
EZE 22:28 Forsooth the prophets thereof pargeted them without tempering, and saw vain things, and divined leasings to them, and said, The Lord God saith these things, when the Lord spake not.
EZE 22:29 The peoples of the land challenged false challenge, and ravished by violence; they tormented a needy man and poor, and oppressed a comeling by false challenge, without doom.
EZE 22:30 And I sought of them a man, that should set [[or put]] an hedge betwixt, and stand set [[even]] against me for the land, that I should not destroy it, and I found not.
EZE 22:31 And I shed out on them mine indignation, and I wasted them in the fire of my wrath; and I yielded the way of them on the head of them, saith the Lord God.
EZE 23:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 23:2 Thou, son of man, two women were the daughters of one mother,
EZE 23:3 and did fornication in Egypt; in their young waxing age they did fornication; there the breasts of them were made low, and the teats of the time of marriage of them were broken.
EZE 23:4 Forsooth the names of them be, Oholah, the more sister, and Oholibah, the less sister of her. And I had them, and they childed sons and daughters; certainly the names of them be Samaria Oholah, and Jerusalem Oholibah.
EZE 23:5 Therefore Oholah did fornication on me, and was wild on her lovers, on Assyrians nighing,
EZE 23:6 clothed with jacinth, princes, and magistrates, young men of covetous-ness, all knights, riders of horses.
EZE 23:7 And she gave her fornications on them, on all the chosen sons of Assyrians; and in all on which she was wild, she was defouled in the uncleanness of them.
EZE 23:8 Furthermore and she left not her fornications, which she had in Egypt; for why and they slept with her in the youth of her, and they brake the teats of the time of marriage of her, and they shed out their fornication [[up]] on her.
EZE 23:9 Therefore I gave her into the hands of her lovers, into the hands of the sons of Assur, on whose lechery she was wild.
EZE 23:10 They discovered the shame of her; they took away the sons and the daughters of her, and killed her with sword; and the women were made infamous, that is, made a scandal, and they did dooms in her.
EZE 23:11 And when her sister Oholibah had seen this, she was wild in lechery more than that sister, and gave unshamefastly her fornication, on the fornication of her sister,
EZE 23:12 to the sons of Assyrians, to dukes and magistrates coming to her, that were clothed with diverse clothes, to knights that were borne on horses, and to young men with noble shape, to all men.
EZE 23:13 And I saw that one way of both sisters was defouled,
EZE 23:14 and she increased her fornications. And when she had seen men painted in the wall, the images of Chaldees expressed with colours,
EZE 23:15 and girded on the reins with knights’ girdles, and caps painted on the heads of them, the forms of all dukes, the likeness of the sons of Babylon, and of the land of Chaldees, in which they were born;
EZE 23:16 she was wild on them by covet-ousness of her eyes, and she sent messengers to them into Chaldea.
EZE 23:17 And when the sons of Babylon were come to her, to the bed of teats, they defouled her in their lecheries of virgins; and she was defouled of them, and the soul of her was filled with revulsion of them.
EZE 23:18 Also she made naked her forni-cations, and discovered her shame; and my soul went away from her, as my soul had gone away from her sister.
EZE 23:19 For she multiplied her fornications, and had mind on the days of her youth, in which she did fornication in the land of Egypt.
EZE 23:20 And she was wild in lechery on the lying-by of them, whose fleshes be as the fleshes of asses, and as the members of horses be the members of them.
EZE 23:21 And thou revisitedest the great trespass of thy youth, when thy breasts were made low in Egypt, and the teats of the time of thy marriage were broken.
EZE 23:22 Therefore, thou Oholibah, the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall raise all thy lovers against thee, of which thy soul was filled with revulsion, and I shall gather them against thee in compass;
EZE 23:23 the sons of Babylon, and all Chaldees, noble and mighty men and princes, [[and]] all the sons of Assyrians, and young men of noble form, dukes, and magistrates, all princes of princes, and [[the]] named riders of horses.
EZE 23:24 And they arrayed with chariot and wheel shall come on thee, the multitude of peoples shall be armed with habergeon, and shield, and basinet, against thee on each side; and I shall give doom before them, and they shall deem thee by their dooms.
EZE 23:25 And I shall set my fervour in thee, which they shall use with thee in strong vengeance; they shall cut away thy nose and thine ears, and they shall slay with sword those things that were left; they shall take thy sons and thy daughters, and thy last thing shall be devoured by fire.
EZE 23:26 And they shall make thee naked of thy clothes, and they shall take away the vessels of thy glory.
EZE 23:27 And I shall make thy great trespass to rest from thee, and thy fornication from the land of Egypt; and thou shalt not raise thine eyes to them, and thou shalt no more have mind on Egypt.
EZE 23:28 For the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall give thee into the hands of them which thou hatest, into the hands of them of which thy soul was filled with revulsion,
EZE 23:29 and they shall do with thee in hatred. And they shall take away all thy travails, and they shall leave thee naked, and full of shame; and the shame of thy fornications shall be showed.
EZE 23:30 Thy great trespass and thy fornications have done these things to thee; for thou didest fornication after heathen men, among which thou were defouled in the idols of them.
EZE 23:31 Thou wentest in the way of thy sister, and I shall give the cup of her in thine hand.
EZE 23:32 The Lord God saith these things, Thou shalt drink the cup of thy sister, the depth, and the broadness; thou that art most able to take, shalt be into scorning, and into mocking.
EZE 23:33 Thou shalt be filled with drunken-ness and sorrow, with the cup of mourning and of heaviness, with the cup of thy sister Samaria.
EZE 23:34 And thou shalt drink it, and thou shalt drink of till to the dregs, or unto the lees, and thou shalt devour the remnants thereof, and thou shalt rend thy breasts, for I the Lord spake, saith the Lord God.
EZE 23:35 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, For thou hast forgotten me, and hast cast forth me behind thy body, bear thou also thy great trespass and thy fornications.
EZE 23:36 And the Lord God said to me, and spake, Son of man, whether thou deemest Oholibah and Oholah, and tellest to them the great trespasses of them?
EZE 23:37 For they did adultery, and blood was in the hands of them, and they did fornication with their idols; furthermore and they offered to those idols the sons which they engendered to me, for to be devoured.
EZE 23:38 But also they did this to me, they defouled my saintuary in that day, and made unholy my sabbaths.
EZE 23:39 And when they sacrificed their sons to their idols, and entered into my saintuary in that day, that they should defoul it, they did also these things in the midst of mine house.
EZE 23:40 They sent to men coming from far, to which they had sent messengers. Therefore lo! they came, to which thou washedest thee, and anointedest thine eyes with ointment of women, and thou were adorned with women’s attire.
EZE 23:41 Thou satest in a full fair bed, and a board was adorned before thee; thou settedest mine incense and mine ointment on it.
EZE 23:42 And a voice of multitude making full out joy was therein; and in men that were brought of the multitude of men, and came from desert, they setted [[or puttedest]] bands in the hands of them, and fair crowns on the heads of them.
EZE 23:43 And I said to her, that was defouled in adulteries, Now also this shall do fornication in her fornication.
EZE 23:44 And they entered to her; as to a woman, an whore, so they entered to Oholah and to Oholibah, cursed women.
EZE 23:45 Therefore these men be just, these shall deem those women by the doom of adulteresses, and by the doom of them that shed out blood; for they be adulteresses, and blood is in the hands of them, and they did fornication with their idols.
EZE 23:46 For the Lord God saith these things, Bring thou multitudes to them, and give thou them into noise, and into raven;
EZE 23:47 and be they stoned with the stones of peoples, and be they sticked together with the swords of them. They shall slay the sons and the daughters of them, and they shall burn with fire the houses of them.
EZE 23:48 And I shall do away great trespass from the land; and all women shall learn, that they do not after the great trespass of them.
EZE 23:49 And they shall give your great trespass on you; and ye shall bear the sins of your idols, and ye shall know, that I am the Lord God.
EZE 24:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, in the ninth year, and in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, and he said,
EZE 24:2 Thou, son of man, write to thee the name of this day, in which the king of Babylon is confirmed in his attack against Jerusalem today.
EZE 24:3 And thou shalt say by a proverb a parable to the house of Israel, stirrer to wrath, and thou shalt speak to them, The Lord God saith these things, Set thou a brazen pot, set thou it soothly, and put thou water into it.
EZE 24:4 Take thou a beast full fat; gather thou together the gobbets thereof into it, each good part, and the hip, and the shoulder, chosen things and full of bones.
EZE 24:5 Also dress thou heaps of bones under it; and the seething thereof boiled out, and the bones thereof were sodden in the midst thereof.
EZE 24:6 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, Woe to the city of bloods, to the pot whose rust is therein, and the rust thereof went not out of it; cast thou out it by parts, and by his parts; and the lot fell not on it.
EZE 24:7 For why the blood thereof is in the midst thereof; he shed it out on a full clear stone, he shed not it out on earth, that it may be covered with dust,
EZE 24:8 that I should bring in mine indignation, and avenge by vengeance; I gave the blood thereof on a full clear stone, that it should not be covered.
EZE 24:9 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, Woe to the city of bloods, whose burning I shall make great;
EZE 24:10 gather thou together [[the]] bones, which I shall kindle with fire; fleshes shall be wasted, and all the setting together shall be sodden, and bones shall fail.
EZE 24:11 Also set thou it void on coals, that the metal thereof wax hot, and be melted, and that the filth thereof be welled together in the midst thereof, and the rust thereof be wasted.
EZE 24:12 It was sweated by much travail, and the over-great rust thereof went not out thereof, neither by fire.
EZE 24:13 Thine uncleanness is abominable; for I would cleanse thee, and thou art not cleansed from thy filths; but neither thou shalt be cleansed before, till I make mine indignation to rest in thee.
EZE 24:14 I the Lord spake; it shall come, and I shall make it, I shall not pass, neither I shall spare, neither I shall be pleased; by thy ways and by thy findings, I shall deem thee, saith the Lord.
EZE 24:15 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 24:16 Thou, son of man, lo! I take away from thee the desirable thing of thine eyes in vengeance, and thou shalt not wail, neither weep, neither thy tears shall flow down.
EZE 24:17 Wail thou while being still, thou shalt not make mourning of dead men; thy crown be bound about thine head, and thy shoes shall be in the feet, neither thou shalt cover the mouth with a cloth, neither thou shalt eat the meats of mourners.
EZE 24:18 Therefore I spake to the people in the morrowtide, and my wife was dead in the eventide; and I did in the morrowtide, as he had commanded to me.
EZE 24:19 And the people said to me, Why showest thou not to us what these things signify, which thou doest?
EZE 24:20 And I said to them, The word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 24:21 Speak thou to the house of Israel, The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall defoul my saintuary, the pride of your empire, and the desirable thing of your eyes, and on which your soul dreadeth; and your sons and your daughters, which ye left, shall fall by sword.
EZE 24:22 And ye shall do, as I did; ye shall not cover mouths with cloth, and ye shall not eat the meat of wailers.
EZE 24:23 Ye shall have crowns in your heads, and shoes in the feet; ye shall not wail, neither ye shall weep, but ye shall fail in wretchedness, for your wickednesses; and each man shall wail to his brother.
EZE 24:24 And Ezekiel shall be to you into a sign of thing to coming, [[or to come]]; by all things which he did, ye shall do, when this thing shall come; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord God.
EZE 24:25 And thou, son of man, lo! in the day in which I shall take away from them the strength of them, and the joy of dignity, and the desire of their eyes, on which the souls of them rest, cast away the sons and the daughters of them;
EZE 24:26 in that day when a man fleeing shall come to thee, to tell to thee;
EZE 24:27 in that day soothly thou shalt open thy mouth with him that fled; and thou shalt speak, and shalt no more be still; and thou shalt be to them into a sign of thing to coming, and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 25:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 25:2 Thou, son of man, set thy face against the sons of Ammon, and thou shalt prophesy of them.
EZE 25:3 And thou shalt say to the sons of Ammon, Hear ye the word of the Lord God; the Lord God saith these things, For that that ye said, Well! well! on my saintuary, for it is defouled, and on the land of Israel, for it is made desolate, and on the house of Judah, for they be led into captivity;
EZE 25:4 lo! therefore I shall give thee to the sons of the east into heritage, and they shall set their folds in thee, and they shall set their tents in thee; they shall eat thy fruits, and they shall drink thy milk.
EZE 25:5 And I shall give Rabbah into a dwelling place of camels, and the sons of Ammon into a bed of beasts; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 25:6 For the Lord God saith these things, For that that thou clappedest with hands, and smitedest with the foot, and joyedest of all [[thy]] desire on the land of Israel;
EZE 25:7 therefore lo! I shall stretch forth mine hand [[up]] on thee, and I shall give thee into ravishing of heathen men, and I shall slay thee from peoples, and I shall lose thee, and all-break thee from lands; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 25:8 The Lord God saith these things, For that that Moab and Seir said, Lo! the house of Judah is as all folks,
EZE 25:9 therefore lo! I shall open the shoulder of Moab of cities, soothly of cities thereof, and of the ends thereof, the noble cities of the land, Beth-jeshimoth, Baalmeon, and Kiriathaim,
EZE 25:10 to the sons of the east, with the sons of Ammon. And I shall give it into heritage, that mind of the sons of Ammon be no more among heathen men,
EZE 25:11 and in Moab I shall make dooms; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 25:12 The Lord God saith these things, For that that Idumea did vengeance, that it avenged itself of the sons of Judah, and sinned doing trespass, and asked greatly vengeance of them;
EZE 25:13 therefore the Lord God saith these things, I shall stretch forth mine hand on Idumea, and I shall take away from it man and beast, and I shall make it desert of the south; and they that be in Dedan shall fall by sword.
EZE 25:14 And I shall give my vengeance on Idumea, by the hand of my people Israel; and they shall do in Edom by my wrath, and by my strong vengeance; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord God.
EZE 25:15 The Lord God saith these things, For that that Palestines did vengeance, and avenged themselves, with all will slaying, and filling old enmities;
EZE 25:16 therefore the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall stretch forth mine hand on Palestines, and I shall slay [[the]] slayers, and I shall lose the remnants of the sea coast;
EZE 25:17 and I shall make great vengeances in them, and I shall reprove in strong vengeance; and they shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall give my vengeance on them.
EZE 26:1 And it was done in the eleventh year, in the first day of the month, the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 26:2 Thou, son of man, for that that Tyre said of Jerusalem, Well! the gates of peoples be broken, it is turned to me; I shall be [[ful]] filled, it is forsaken;
EZE 26:3 therefore the Lord God saith these things, Lo! Tyre, I on thee; and I shall make many folks to ascend [[or go up]] to thee, as the sea flowing ascendeth [[or goeth up]].
EZE 26:4 And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre, and they shall destroy the towers thereof; and I shall raze the dust thereof from it, and I shall give it into a most clear stone.
EZE 26:5 Drying of nets [[it]] shall be in the midst of the sea, for I spake, saith the Lord God. And Tyre shall be into ravishing to heathen men.
EZE 26:6 And the daughters thereof that be in the field, shall be slain by sword; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 26:7 For why the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall bring to Tyre Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, from the north, the king of kings, with horses, and chariots, and knights, and with a company, and great people.
EZE 26:8 He shall slay by sword thy daughters that be in the field, and he shall encompass thee with strongholds, and he shall bear together [[the heap of]] earth in compass. And he shall raise a shield against thee,
EZE 26:9 and he shall temper engines like vineries [[or vines]], and engines that be called wethers against thy walls; and he shall destroy thy towers by his arms.
EZE 26:10 By flowing of his horses, the dust of those [[or them]] shall cover thee; thy walls shall be moved of the sound of knights, and of wheels, and of chariots; when he shall enter by the gates, as by enterings of a city destroyed,
EZE 26:11 with the claws of his horses he shall defoul all thy streets. He shall slay by sword thy people, and thy noble images shall fall down into earth.
EZE 26:12 They shall waste thy riches, they shall ravish thy merchandise; and they shall destroy thy walls, and they shall destroy thine houses full clear, and thy stones, and thy trees, and they shall put thy dust in the midst of waters.
EZE 26:13 And I shall make to rest the multitude of thy singers, and the sound of thine harps shall no more be heard;
EZE 26:14 and I shall give thee into a most clear stone. Thou shalt be a place for the drying of nets, and thou shalt no more be builded, for I the Lord spake, saith the Lord God.
EZE 26:15 The Lord God saith these things of Tyre, Whether isles shall not be moved of the sound of thy fall, and of the wailing of thy slain men, when they be slain in the midst of thee?
EZE 26:16 And all the princes of the sea shall go down off their seats, and they shall do away their mantles, either their spoils of slain enemies, and they shall cast away their diverse clothes, and shall be clothed with wondering. They shall sit in the earth, and shall be astonied, and shall wonder on thy sudden fall.
EZE 26:17 And they shall take wailing on thee, and shall say to thee, How perishedest thou, noble city, that dwellest in the sea, that were strong in the sea, with thy dwellers, which dwellers all men dreaded?
EZE 26:18 Now ships shall wonder in the day of thy dread, and isles in the sea shall be troubled, for none goeth out of thee.
EZE 26:19 For the Lord God saith these things, When I shall give thee to be a city desolate, as the cities that be not inhabited, and I shall bring on thee the depth of waters, and many waters shall cover thee.
EZE 26:20 And I shall draw thee down with them that go down into a pit, to the people everlasting; and I shall set thee in the last land, as old wilder-nesses, with them that be led down into a pit, that thou be not inhabited. Certainly when I shall give glory in the land of livers,
EZE 26:21 I shall drive thee into nought, and thou shalt not be; and thou shalt be sought, and thou shalt no more be found without end, saith the Lord God.
EZE 27:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 27:2 Therefore thou, son of man, take wailing on Tyre.
EZE 27:3 And thou shalt say to Tyre, that dwelleth in the entering of the sea, to the selling of merchandise of peoples to many isles, The Lord God saith these things, O! Tyre, thou saidest, I am of perfect fairness,
EZE 27:4 and I am set in the heart of the sea. They that be in thy coasts that builded thee, [[ful]] filled thy fairness;
EZE 27:5 they builded thee with fir trees of Senir, with all works of boards of the sea; they took a cedar of the Lebanon, to make a mast to thee.
EZE 27:6 They hewed oaks of Bashan into thine oars, they made to thee thy seats of rowers of ivory of India, and cabins of the wood of the isles of Italy.
EZE 27:7 Diverse bis, either white silk, of Egypt, was woven to thee into a veil, that it should be set [[or put]] in the mast; jacinth and purple of the isles of Elishah were made thy covering.
EZE 27:8 The dwellers of Sidon and Arvad-ians were thy rowers; Tyre, thy wise men were made thy governors.
EZE 27:9 The old men of Byblos, and the prudent men thereof, had shipmen to the service of thy diverse array of household; all the ships of the sea, and the shipmen of these [[or them]], were in the people of thy merchandise.
EZE 27:10 Persians, and Ludians, and Libyans were in thine host; thy men warriors hanged in thee a shield and helmet, for thine adorning.
EZE 27:11 Sons of Arvadians with thine host were on thy walls in thy compass; but also Gammadims, that were in thy towers, hanged their arrow cases on thy walls by compass; they [[ful]] filled thy fairness.
EZE 27:12 Carthaginians, thy merchants, of the multitude of all kind of riches filled thy fairs, with silver, and iron, with tin, and lead.
EZE 27:13 Greece, and Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy merchants, and brought bondmen and brazen vessels to thy people.
EZE 27:14 From the house of Togarmah they brought horses, and horsemen, and mules, to thy chapping.
EZE 27:15 The sons of Dedan were thy merchants; many isles provided the merchandise of thine hand, they exchanged teeth of ivory, and of ebony, in thy price.
EZE 27:16 Syria was thy merchant, for the multitude of thy works, they setted forth in thy market gems, and purple, and clothes woven diversely at the manner of shields, and bis, and silk, and coral, either avoirdupois.
EZE 27:17 Judah and the land of Israel were thy merchants in the best wheat, and setted forth in thy fairs balm, and honey, and oil, and resin.
EZE 27:18 Damascus was thy merchant, in the multitude of thy works, in the multitude of diverse riches, in fat wine, and wools of best colour.
EZE 27:19 Dan, and Greece, and Uzal, setted forth in thy fairs iron made subtly, gum of myrrh, and calamus, that is, a spice sweet smelling, in thy merchandise.
EZE 27:20 Dedan were thy merchants, in tapets to sit upon.
EZE 27:21 Arabia and all the princes of Kedar, they were the merchants of thine hand; with lambs, and wethers, and goat kids, thy merchants came to thee.
EZE 27:22 The sellers of Sheba and of Raamah, they were thy merchants, with all the best sweet smelling spices, and precious stone, and gold, which they setted forth in thy market.
EZE 27:23 Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, were thy merchants; Sheba, and Assur, and Chilmad, were thy sellers.
EZE 27:24 They were thy merchants in many manners, in fardels of jacinth, and of clothes of many colours, and of precious riches, that were wrapped and bound with cords.
EZE 27:25 Also ships of the sea had cedars in their merchandises; thy princes were in thy merchandise; and thou were [[ful]] filled, and were glorified greatly in the heart of the sea.
EZE 27:26 Thy rowers brought thee in many waters, but the south wind all-brake thee; in the heart of the sea were
EZE 27:27 thy riches, and thy treasures, and thy manyfold instruments. Thy shipmen, and thy governors that held thy appurtenance of household, and were sovereigns of thy people, and thy men warriors that were in thee, with all thy multitude which is in the midst of thee, shall fall down in the heart of the sea, in the day of thy falling.
EZE 27:28 Ships shall be troubled of the sound of the cry of thy governors;
EZE 27:29 and all men that held oar, shall go down out of their ships. Shipmen and all governors of the sea shall stand in the land;
EZE 27:30 and shall yell on thee with great voice. And they shall cry bitterly, and shall cast powder, [[or dust]], on their heads, and shall be sprinkled with ashes.
EZE 27:31 And they shall shave baldness on thee, and shall be gird with hair-shirts, and they shall beweep thee in bitterness of soul, with most bitter weeping.
EZE 27:32 And they shall take on thee a song of mourning, and they shall bewail thee, Who is as Tyre, that was [[or wax]] dumb in the midst of the sea?
EZE 27:33 And thou, Tyre, filledest the needs of many peoples in the going out of thy merchandise of the sea; in the multitude of thy riches, and of thy peoples, thou madest rich the kings of earth.
EZE 27:34 Now thou art all-broken of the sea, in the depths of waters. Thy riches and all thy multitude that was in the midst of thee fell down;
EZE 27:35 all the dwellers of isles and the kings of those [[or them]] were astonied on thee. All they were smitten with tempest, and changed their cheers;
EZE 27:36 the merchants of peoples hissed, [[or scorned]], on thee. Thou art brought to nought, and thou shalt not be till into without end.
EZE 28:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 28:2 Son of man, say thou to the prince of Tyre, The Lord God saith these things, For thine heart was raised [[up]], and thou saidest, I am God, and I sat in the chair of God, in the heart of the sea, since thou art man and not God, and thou gavest thine heart as the heart of God;
EZE 28:3 lo! thou art wiser than Daniel, each private is not hid from thee;
EZE 28:4 in thy wisdom and prudence thou madest to thee strength, and thou gattest to thee gold and silver in thy treasuries;
EZE 28:5 in the multitude of thy wisdom, and in thy merchandise thou multipliedest to thee strength, and thine heart was raised [[up]] in thy strength;
EZE 28:6 therefore the Lord God saith these things, For thine heart was raised [[up]] as the heart of God,
EZE 28:7 therefore lo! I shall bring on thee aliens, the strongest of heathen. And they shall make naked their swords on the fairness of thy wisdom, and they shall defoul thy fairness.
EZE 28:8 They shall slay, and draw down thee into the pit; and thou shalt die by the death of uncircumcised men, in the heart of the sea.
EZE 28:9 Whether thou shalt say, and speak, I am God, before them that slay thee; since thou art a man, and not God? In the hand of them that slay thee,
EZE 28:10 by death of uncircumcised men, thou shalt die in the hand of aliens; for I the Lord spake, saith the Lord God.
EZE 28:11 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 28:12 Son of man, raise thou wailing on the king of Tyre; and thou shalt say to him, The Lord God saith these things, Thou, a print of likeness, full of wisdom, perfect in fairness,
EZE 28:13 were in the delights of paradise of God. Each precious stone was thy covering, sardius, topaz, and jasper, chrysolyte, and onyx, and beryl, sapphire, and carbuncle, and smaragdus; also gold was the work of thy fairness, and thine holes were made ready, in the day in which thou were made.
EZE 28:14 Thou were with a cherub held forth, and covering; and I setted thee in the holy hill of God. In the midst of stones set afire thou wentest,
EZE 28:15 perfect in thy ways from the day of thy making, till wickedness was found in thee.
EZE 28:16 In the multitude of thy merchandise, thine inner things were filled of wickedness, and thou didest sin; and I casted thee out of the hill of God, and, thou cherub covering afar, I lost thee from the midst of stones set afire.
EZE 28:17 And thine heart was raised [[up]] in thy fairness, thou lostest thy wisdom in thy fairness. I casted thee down into earth, I gave thee before the face of kings, that they should see thee.
EZE 28:18 In the multitude of thy wicked-nesses, and in the wickedness of thy merchandise, thou defouledest thine hallowing; therefore I shall bring forth fire of the midst of thee, that shall eat thee; and I shall give thee into ashes on [[the]] earth, in the sight of all men seeing thee.
EZE 28:19 All men that shall see thee among heathen men, shall be astonied on thee; thou art made nought, and thou shalt not be without end.
EZE 28:20 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 28:21 Thou, son of man, set thy face against Sidon, and thou shalt prophesy of it;
EZE 28:22 and shalt say, The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I to thee, Sidon, and I shall be glorified in the midst of thee; and they shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall do dooms in it, and I shall be hallowed therein.
EZE 28:23 And I shall send pestilence into it, and blood in the streets thereof, and slain men by sword shall fall down in the midst thereof by compass; and they shall know, that I am the Lord God.
EZE 28:24 And there shall no more be an hurting of bitterness to the house of Israel, and a thorn bringing in sorrow on each side, by the compass of them, that be adversaries to them; and they shall know, that I am the Lord God.
EZE 28:25 The Lord God saith these things, When I shall gather together the house of Israel from peoples, among which they be scattered, I shall be hallowed in them before heathen men. And they shall dwell in their land, which I gave to my servant Jacob.
EZE 28:26 And they shall dwell secure therein, and they shall build houses, and they shall plant vines, and they shall dwell trustily, when I shall make dooms in all men that be adversaries to them by compass; and they shall know, that I am the Lord God of them.
EZE 29:1 In the tenth year, in the twelfth month, in the first day of the month, the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 29:2 Thou, son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh, king of Egypt; and thou shalt prophesy of him, and of all Egypt.
EZE 29:3 Speak thou, and thou shalt say, The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I to thee, thou Pharaoh, king of Egypt, thou great dragon, that liest in the midst of thy floods, and sayest, The flood is mine, and I made it for myself.
EZE 29:4 And I shall set [[or put]] a bridle in thy cheeks, and I shall glue the fishes of thy floods to thy scales; and I shall draw thee out of the midst of thy floods, and all thy fishes shall cleave to thy scales.
EZE 29:5 And I shall cast thee forth into desert, and all the fishes of thy flood; on the face of earth thou shalt fall down, thou shalt not be gathered [[up]], neither shalt be gathered together to thy people; to the beasts of earth, and to the volatiles of the air, I gave thee to be devoured.
EZE 29:6 And all the dwellers of Egypt shall know, that I am the Lord. For that that thou were a staff of a reed to the house of Israel,
EZE 29:7 when they took hold of thee with their hands, and thou were broken, and rentest each shoulder of them, and when they rested on thee, thou were made less, and thou hast loosed, either discomforted, all the reins of them;
EZE 29:8 therefore the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall bring a sword on thee, and I shall slay of thee man and beast;
EZE 29:9 and the land of Egypt shall be into desert, and into wilderness, and they shall know, that I am the Lord. For that that thou saidest, The flood is mine, and I made it,
EZE 29:10 therefore lo! I to thee, and to thy floods. And I shall give into wilder-ness the land of Egypt, destroyed by sword, from the tower of Syene till to the terms of Ethiopia.
EZE 29:11 The foot of man shall not pass by it, neither the foot of beast shall go in it, and it shall not be inhabited in forty years.
EZE 29:12 And I shall give the land of Egypt forsaken, in the midst of lands forsaken, and the cities thereof in the midst of a city destroyed, and those shall be desolate by forty years. And I shall scatter Egyptians into nations, and I shall winnow them into lands.
EZE 29:13 For the Lord God saith these things, After the end of forty years I shall gather together Egypt from peoples, among which they were scattered;
EZE 29:14 and I shall bring again the captivity of Egypt. And I shall set them again in the land of Pathros, in the land of their birth; and they shall be there into a meek realm,
EZE 29:15 and among other realms it shall be most low, and it shall no more be raised over nations. And I shall make them less, that they reign not on heathen men;
EZE 29:16 and they shall no more be to the house of Israel in trust, teaching them wickedness, that they flee, and follow them; and they shall know, that I am the Lord God.
EZE 29:17 And it was done in the seven and twentieth year, in the first month, in the first day of the month, the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 29:18 Thou, son of man, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, made his host to serve by great service against Tyre; each head was made bald, and each shoulder was made bare of hair, and meed was not yielded of Tyre to him, neither to his host, for the service by which he served to me against it.
EZE 29:19 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall give Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, in the land of Egypt, and he shall take the multitude thereof; and he shall take in prey the clothes thereof, and he shall ravish the spoils thereof, and meed shall be to his host,
EZE 29:20 and to the work for which he served to me against it; and I gave the land of Egypt to him, for that that he travailed to me, saith the Lord God.
EZE 29:21 In that day, an horn of the house of Israel shall come forth, and I shall give to thee an open mouth in the midst of them; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 30:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 30:2 Son of man, prophesy thou, and say, The Lord God saith these things, Yell ye, Woe! woe! to the day,
EZE 30:3 for the day is nigh; and the day of the Lord nigheth, the day of a cloud. The time of heathen men shall be;
EZE 30:4 and a sword shall come into Egypt, and dread shall be in Ethiopia, when wounded men shall fall down in Egypt, and the multitude thereof shall be taken away, and the founda-ments thereof shall be destroyed.
EZE 30:5 Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydians, and all the residue common people, and Chub, and the sons of the land of bond of peace, shall fall down by sword with them.
EZE 30:6 The Lord God saith these things, And they that underset Egypt shall fall down, and the pride of the lordship thereof shall be destroyed; from the tower of Syene they shall fall by sword therein, saith the Lord God of hosts.
EZE 30:7 And they shall be destroyed in the midst of lands made desolate, and the cities thereof shall be in the midst of cities forsaken.
EZE 30:8 And they shall know, that I am the Lord God, when I shall give fire in Egypt, and all the helpers thereof shall be all-broken.
EZE 30:9 In that day messengers shall go out from my face in ships with three orders of oars, to all-break, [[or destroy]], the trust of Ethiopia; and dread shall be in them in the day of Egypt, for without doubt it shall come.
EZE 30:10 The Lord God saith these things, And I shall make to cease the multitude of Egypt in the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon.
EZE 30:11 He and his people with him, the strongest men of heathen men, shall be brought, to lose the land; and they shall draw out their swords on Egypt, and they shall fill the land with slain men.
EZE 30:12 And I shall make dry the bottoms of floods, and I shall give the land into the hand of the worst men; and I shall destroy the land, and the fullness thereof in the hand of aliens; I the Lord spake.
EZE 30:13 The Lord God saith these things, And I shall lose simulacra, and I shall make idols to cease from Memphis, and a duke of the land of Egypt shall no more be. And I shall give dread in the land of Egypt,
EZE 30:14 and I shall lose, [[or destroy]], the land of Pathros. And I shall give fire in Tanis, and I shall make my dooms in Alexandria.
EZE 30:15 And I shall shed out mine indig-nation on Pelusium, the strength of Egypt; and I shall slay the multitude of Alexandria,
EZE 30:16 and I shall give fire in Egypt. Pelusium, as a woman travailing of child, shall have sorrow, and Alexandria shall be destroyed, and in Memphis shall be each day’s anguishes.
EZE 30:17 The young men of Heliopolis and of Bubastis shall fall down by sword, and those cities shall be led captives.
EZE 30:18 And in Tahpanhes the day shall wax black, when I shall all-break there the sceptres of Egypt, and the pride of the power thereof shall fail therein. A cloud shall cover it; forsooth the daughters thereof shall be led into captivity,
EZE 30:19 and I shall make dooms in Egypt; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 30:20 And it was done in the eleventh year, in the first month, in the seventh day of the month, the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 30:21 Thou, son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh, king of Egypt; and lo! it is not wrapped [[about]], that health should be restored thereto, that it should be bound with linen clothes, and wound about with linen clothes, and that he might hold a sword again, when he had received strength.
EZE 30:22 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I to Pharaoh, king of Egypt; I shall make less his strong arm but broken, and I shall cast down the sword from his hand.
EZE 30:23 And I shall scatter Egypt among heathen men, and I shall winnow them in lands.
EZE 30:24 And I shall strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and I shall give my sword into the hand of him; and I shall break the arms of Pharaoh, and men slain before his face shall wail by wailings.
EZE 30:25 And I shall strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down. And they shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall give my sword in the hand of the king of Babylon; and he shall stretch forth it on the land of Egypt.
EZE 30:26 And I shall scatter Egypt into nations, and I shall winnow them into lands; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 31:1 And it was done in the eleventh year, in the third month, in the first day of the month, the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 31:2 Thou, son of man, say to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and to his people, To whom art thou made like in thy greatness?
EZE 31:3 Lo! Assur as a cedar in Lebanon, fair in branches, and full of boughs, and high by highness; and his height was raised [[up]] among thick boughs.
EZE 31:4 Waters nourished him, the depth of waters enhanced him; his floods floated out in the compass of his roots, and he sent out his strands to all the trees of the country.
EZE 31:5 Therefore his highness was enhanced over all [[the]] trees of the country, and his trees were multiplied, and his branches were raised [[up]], for many waters. And when he had stretched forth his shadow,
EZE 31:6 all the volatiles of the air made nests in his branches; and all the beasts of forests engendered under his boughs, and the company of full many folks dwelled under the shadowing place of him.
EZE 31:7 And he was full fair in his greatness, and in alarging of his trees; for the root of him was beside many waters.
EZE 31:8 Cedars in the paradise of God were not higher than he; fir trees attained not evenly to the highness of him, and plane trees were not even with the boughs of him. Each tree of paradise of God was not made like him in his fairness.
EZE 31:9 For I made him fair, and with many and thick boughs; and all the trees of lust or Eden, that were in the paradise of God, had envy to him.
EZE 31:10 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, For that that he was raised in highness, and he gave his highness green and thick, and his heart was raised [[up]] in his highness;
EZE 31:11 now I have given him into the hands of the strongest man of heathen men. And he doing shall do to that Assur; after the unfaithfulness of him I casted him out.
EZE 31:12 And aliens, and the most cruel men of nations, shall cut him down, and shall cast him forth on hills [[or mountains]]. And his branches shall fall down in all the great valleys, and his trees shall be broken in all rocks of stone of earth. And all the peoples of earth shall go away from his shadowing place, and shall forsake him.
EZE 31:13 All the volatiles of the air dwelled in the falling of him, and all beasts of the country were in the branches of him.
EZE 31:14 Wherefore all the trees of waters shall not be raised [[up]] in their highness, neither shall set their highness among places full of woods, and full of boughs, and all trees that be moisted of waters shall not stand in the highness of those [[or them]]. For all they be given into death, to the farthest land in the midst of the sons of men, to them that go down into the pit.
EZE 31:15 The Lord God saith these things, In the day when he went down to hells, I brought in mourning; I covered him with depth of waters, and I forbade his floods, and I refrained many waters. The Lebanon was sorry on him, and all the trees of the field were shaken of the sound of his falling.
EZE 31:16 I moved altogether heathen men, when I led him down to hell, with them that went down into the pit. And all trees of liking, noble trees, and full clear in the Lebanon, all that were moisted with waters, were comforted in the lowest land.
EZE 31:17 For why also they shall go down with him to hell, to [[the]] slain men with sword; and the arm of each man, shall sit under the shadowing place of him, in the midst of nations.
EZE 31:18 To whom art thou likened, thou noble and high among the trees of liking? Lo! thou art led down with the trees of liking to the farthest land. In the midst of uncircumcised men thou shalt sleep, with them that be slain by sword. That is Pharaoh, and all the multitude of him, saith the Lord God.
EZE 32:1 And it was done in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the first day of the month, the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 32:2 Thou, son of man, take wailing on Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and thou shalt say to him, Thou were made like to a lion of heathen men, and to a dragon which is in the sea. And thou winnowest with horn in thy floods, and thou disturbedest [[or troublest]] waters with thy feet, and defouledest the floods of those [[or them]].
EZE 32:3 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, I shall spread abroad my net [[up]] on thee in the multitude of many peoples, and I shall draw thee out in my net;
EZE 32:4 and I shall cast forth thee into [[the]] earth. On the face of the field I shall cast thee away, and I shall make all the volatiles of heaven to dwell on thee, and I shall fill of thee the beasts of all earth.
EZE 32:5 And I shall give thy fleshes on hills, and I shall fill thy little hills with thy roots;
EZE 32:6 and I shall moist the earth with the stink of thy blood on mountains, and valleys shall be filled of thee.
EZE 32:7 And when thou shalt be quenched, I shall cover heavens, and I shall make black the stars thereof; I shall cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not give her light.
EZE 32:8 I shall make all the light-givers of heaven to mourn on thee, and I shall give darknesses on thy land, saith the Lord God; when thy wounded men shall fall down in the midst of earth, saith the Lord God.
EZE 32:9 And I shall stir to wrath the heart of many peoples, when I shall bring in thy sorrow among folks, on lands which thou knowest not.
EZE 32:10 And I shall make many peoples to wonder on thee, and the kings of them shall dread with full great horror, or hideousness, on thee, for all thy wickednesses which thou wroughtest, when my sword shall begin to fly on the faces of them. And all men shall be astonied suddenly, for their life, in the day of their falling.
EZE 32:11 For the Lord God saith these things, The sword of the king of Babylon shall come to thee;
EZE 32:12 in swords of strong men I shall cast down thy multitude, all these folks that be not able to be overcome. And they shall waste the pride of Egypt, and the multitude thereof shall be destroyed.
EZE 32:13 And I shall lose all the beasts thereof, that were on full many waters; and the foot of a man shall no more trouble those waters, neither the claw of beasts shall trouble those [[or them]].
EZE 32:14 Then I shall yield the waters of them cleanest, and I shall bring the floods of them as oil, saith the Lord God,
EZE 32:15 when I shall give desolate the land of Egypt. Forsooth the land shall be forsaken of his fullness, when I shall smite all the dwellers thereof; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 32:16 It is a wailing, and the daughters of heathen men shall bewail him; they shall bewail him on Egypt, and they shall bewail him on the multitude thereof, saith the Lord God.
EZE 32:17 And it was done in the twelfth year, in the fifteen day of the month, the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 32:18 Son of man, sing thou a song of wailing on the multitude of Egypt, and draw thou down it the same, and the daughters of strong heathen men, to the last land, with them that went down into the pit.
EZE 32:19 Inasmuch as thou art fairer, go down, and sleep with uncircumcised men.
EZE 32:20 In the midst of slain men they shall fall down by sword; a sword is given, and they draw it to, and all the peoples thereof.
EZE 32:21 The mightest of strong men shall speak to him, from the midst of hell, which with their helpers went down, and slept uncircumcised, and slain by sword.
EZE 32:22 Saying, There is Assur, and all his multitude; the sepulchres of them be in the compass of him; all slain men, that fell down by sword,
EZE 32:23 whose sepulchres be given in the last things of the pit. And the multitude of him is made there by the compass of his sepulchre; all slain men, and falling down by sword, which gave sometime their fearedful-ness in the land of living men.
EZE 32:24 There is Elam, and all the multitude thereof by the compass of his sepulchre; all these were slain, and falling down by sword, that went down uncircumcised to the last land; which setted their dread in the land of living men, and bare their shame with them that go down into the pit.
EZE 32:25 In the midst of slain men they putted his bed in all the peoples of him; his sepulchre is in the compass of him. All these were uncircumcised and slain by sword, for they gave dread in the land of living men, and bare their shame with them that go down into the pit; they be set [[or put]] in the midst of slain men.
EZE 32:26 There be Meshech and Tubal, and all the multitude thereof; the sepulchres thereof be in the compass thereof. All these men uncircumcised were slain, and falling down by sword, for they gave their dread in the land of living men.
EZE 32:27 And they shall not sleep with strong men, and falling down, and uncircumcised, that went down into hell with their arms, and putted their swords under their heads. And the wickednesses of them were in the bones of them, for they were made the dread of strong men in the land of living men.
EZE 32:28 And thou therefore shalt be defouled in the midst of uncircumcised men, and shalt sleep with them that be slain with sword.
EZE 32:29 There is Idumea, and the kings thereof, and all dukes thereof, that be given with their host, with men slain by sword, and which slept with uncircumcised men, and them that went down into the pit.
EZE 32:30 There be all princes of the north, and all hunters, that were led forth with slain men, that be dreading and shamed in their strength, which slept uncircumcised with men slain by sword, and bare their shame with them that went down into the pit.
EZE 32:31 Pharaoh saw them, and was comforted on all his multitude that was slain by sword. And Pharaoh and all his host, saith the Lord God, bare their shame with them that went down into the pit;
EZE 32:32 for he gave his dread in the land of living men. And Pharaoh and all his multitude slept in the midst of uncircumcised men, with men slain by sword, saith the Lord God.
EZE 33:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 33:2 Thou, son of man, speak to the sons of thy people, and thou shalt say to them, A land when I bring in a sword on it, and the people of the land take one man of his last men, and maketh him a beholder, either espyer, on him,
EZE 33:3 and when he seeth a sword coming on the land, and soundeth with a clarion, and telleth to the people,
EZE 33:4 forsooth a man that heareth, whoever he is, the sound of the clarion, and keepeth not himself, and the sword cometh, and taketh him away, the blood of him shall be on the head of him.
EZE 33:5 He heard the sound of the clarion, and kept not himself, his blood shall be in him; forsooth if he keepeth himself, he shall save his life.
EZE 33:6 That if the beholder or the espyer, seeth a sword coming, and soundeth not with a clarion, and the people keepeth not himself, and the sword cometh, and taketh away a man of them, soothly he is taken in his wickedness; but I shall seek the blood of him of the hand of the espyer.
EZE 33:7 And thou, son of man, I gave thee an espyer, to the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear of my mouth a word, and shalt tell to them of me.
EZE 33:8 If when I say to the wicked man, Thou, wicked man, shalt die by death, thou speakest not, that the wicked man keep himself from his way, that wicked man shall die in his wicked-ness, but I shall seek his blood of thine hand.
EZE 33:9 Forsooth if when thou tellest to the wicked man, that he be converted from his ways, and he is not con-verted from his ways, he shall die in his wickedness; certainly thou hast delivered thy soul.
EZE 33:10 Therefore thou, son of man, say to the house of Israel, Thus ye spake, saying, Our wickednesses and our sins be [[up]] on us, and we fail in those [[or them]]; how therefore may we live?
EZE 33:11 say thou to them, I live, saith the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked man, but that the wicked man be converted from his ways, and live; be ye converted from your worst ways, and why shall ye die, the house of Israel?
EZE 33:12 Therefore thou, son of man, say to the sons of thy people, The rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] of a rightful man shall not deliver him, in whatever day he doeth sin; and the wickedness of a wicked man shall not annoy him, in whatever day he is converted from his wickedness; and a just man shall not be able to live in his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], in whatever day he doeth sin.
EZE 33:13 Also if I say to a just man, that he shall live by life, and he trusteth in his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], and doeth wickedness, all his rightfulnesses [[or rightwisenesses]] shall be given to forgetting, and in his wickedness which he wrought, in that he shall die.
EZE 33:14 Forsooth if I say to the wicked man, Thou shalt die by death, and he doeth penance for his sin, and doeth doom and rightfulness,
EZE 33:15 and if that wicked man restoreth a wed, and yieldeth raven, and goeth in the commandments of life, and doeth not any unjust thing, he shall live by life, and shall not die.
EZE 33:16 All his sins which he sinned, shall not be areckoned to him; he did doom and rightfulness, he shall live by life.
EZE 33:17 And the sons of thy people said, The way of the Lord is not of even weight, [[or even charge]]; and the way of them is unjust.
EZE 33:18 For when a just man goeth away from his rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], and doeth wickednesses, he shall die in those [[or them]];
EZE 33:19 and when a wicked man goeth away from his wickedness, and doeth doom and rightfulness, he shall live in those [[or them]].
EZE 33:20 And ye say, The way of the Lord is not rightful [[or right]]. I shall deem each man by his ways of you, the house of Israel.
EZE 33:21 And it was done in the twelfth year, in the tenth month, in the fifth day of the month of our passing over, he that fled from Jerusalem came to me, and said, The city is destroyed.
EZE 33:22 Forsooth the hand of the Lord was made to me in the eventide, before that he came that fled; and he opened my mouth, till he came to me early; and when my mouth was opened, I was no more still.
EZE 33:23 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 33:24 Thou, son of man, they that dwell in these ruinous things, either ready to fall down, on the earth of Israel, say, speaking, Abraham was one, and by heritage he had the land in possession; forsooth we be many, the land is given to us into possession.
EZE 33:25 Therefore thou shalt say to them, The Lord God saith these things, Whether ye that eat in blood, and raise your eyes to your uncleannesses, and shed blood, shall have in pos-session the land by heritage?
EZE 33:26 Ye stood in your swords, ye did your abominations, and each man defouled the wife of his neighbour; and shall ye wield the land by heritage?
EZE 33:27 Thou shalt say these things to them, Thus saith the Lord God, I live, for they that dwell in ruinous things, either ready to fall down, shall fall down by sword, and he that is in the field, shall be given to beasts to be devoured; but they that be in strong-holds and in dens, shall die by pestilence.
EZE 33:28 And I shall give the land into wilderness, and into desert, and the pride and the strength thereof shall fail; and the hills of Israel shall be made desolate, for none is that shall pass by those [[or them]].
EZE 33:29 And they shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall give their land desolate and desert, for all their abominations which they wrought.
EZE 33:30 And thou, son of man, the sons of thy people that speak of thee beside walls, and in the doors of houses, and say, one to another, a man to his neighbour, and speak, Come ye, and hear we, what is the word going out from the Lord;
EZE 33:31 and they come to thee, as if my people entereth, and my people sit before thee, and they hear thy words, and do not those [[or them]]; for they turn those [[or them]] into the song of their mouth, and their heart pursueth their avarice;
EZE 33:32 and it is to them as a song of music, which is sung by soft and sweet sound; and they hear thy words, and they do not those [[or them]];
EZE 33:33 and when that that was before-said cometh, for lo! it cometh, then they shall know, that a prophet was among them.
EZE 34:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 34:2 Son of man, prophesy thou of the shepherds of Israel, prophesy thou; and thou shalt say to the shepherds, The Lord God saith these things, Woe to the shepherds of Israel, that fed himself [[or themselves]]; whether flocks be not fed of shepherds?
EZE 34:3 Ye ate [[the]] milk, and were covered with [[the]] wools, and ye killed that that was fat; but ye fed not my flock.
EZE 34:4 Ye made not firm that that was unsteadfast, and ye made not whole that that was sick; ye bound not up that that was broken, and ye brought not again that that was cast away, and ye sought not that that perished; but ye commanded to them with sternness, and with power.
EZE 34:5 And my sheep were scattered, for no shepherd was; and they were made into devouring of all beasts of the field, and they were scattered.
EZE 34:6 My flocks erred in all mountains, and in each high hill, and my flocks were scattered on all the face of earth, and none was that sought.
EZE 34:7 Therefore, shepherds, hear ye the word of the Lord;
EZE 34:8 I live, saith the Lord God, for why for that that my flocks be made into raven, and my sheep into devouring of all beasts of the field, for that that no shepherd was, for the shepherds sought not my flocks, but the shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my flocks;
EZE 34:9 therefore, shepherds, hear ye the word of the Lord,
EZE 34:10 The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I myself am over [[the]] shepherds; I shall seek my flock of the hand of them, and I shall make them to cease, that they feed no more my flock, and that the shepherds feed no more themselves. And I shall deliver my flock from the mouth of them, and it shall no more be into meat to them.
EZE 34:11 For the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I myself shall seek my sheep, and I shall visit them.
EZE 34:12 As a shepherd visiteth his flock, in the day when he is in the midst of his sheep that be scattered, so I shall visit my sheep; and I shall deliver them from all places in which they were scattered, in the day of cloud, and of darkness.
EZE 34:13 And I shall lead them out of peoples, and I shall gather them from lands, and I shall bring them into their land, and I shall feed them in the hills of Israel, in rivers, and in all seats of earth.
EZE 34:14 I shall feed them in most plenteous pastures, and the pastures of them shall be in the high hills of Israel; there they shall rest in green herbs, and in fat pastures they shall be fed on the hills of Israel.
EZE 34:15 I shall feed my sheep, and I shall make them to lie down, or to rest, saith the Lord God.
EZE 34:16 I shall seek that that perished, and I shall bring again that that was cast away; and I shall bind up that that was broken, and I shall make strong that that was sick; and I shall keep that that is fat and strong; and I shall feed them in doom;
EZE 34:17 forsooth ye be my flocks. The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I deem betwixt beast and beast, and a wether and a buck of goats.
EZE 34:18 Whether it was not enough to you to devour good pastures? Further-more and ye defouled with your feet the remnants of your pastures, and when ye drank clearest water, ye disturbed the residue with your feet.
EZE 34:19 And my sheep were fed with these things that were defouled with your feet; and they drank these things, that your feet had troubled.
EZE 34:20 Therefore the Lord God saith these things to you, Lo! I myself deem betwixt a fat beast and a lean beast.
EZE 34:21 For that that ye hurled with your sides, and shoulders, and winnowed with your horns all sick beasts, till those [[or they]] were scattered withoutforth,
EZE 34:22 I shall save my flock, and it shall no more be into raven. And I shall deem betwixt beast and beast;
EZE 34:23 and I shall raise on those [[or them]] one shepherd, my servant David, that shall feed those [[or them]]; he shall feed them, and he shall be a shepherd to them.
EZE 34:24 Forsooth I the Lord shall be into God to them, and my servant David shall be prince in the midst of them; I the Lord spake.
EZE 34:25 And I shall make with them a covenant of peace, and I shall make [[the]] worst beasts to cease from [[the]] earth; and they that dwell in desert, shall sleep secure in forests.
EZE 34:26 And I shall set them [[a]] blessing in the compass of my little hill, and I shall lead down rain in his time. And rains of blessing shall be,
EZE 34:27 and the tree of the field shall give his fruit, and the earth shall give his seed. And they shall be in their land without dread; and they shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall all-break the chains of their yoke, and shall deliver them from the hand of them that command to them.
EZE 34:28 And they shall no more be into raven into heathen men, neither the beasts of [[the]] earth shall devour them, but they shall dwell trustily without any dread.
EZE 34:29 And I shall raise to them a just burgeoning named; and they shall no more be made less for hunger in earth, and they shall no more bear the shame of heathen men.
EZE 34:30 And they shall know, that I am their Lord God with them, and they be my people, the house of Israel, saith the Lord God.
EZE 34:31 Forsooth ye my flocks be men, the flocks of my pasture; and I am your Lord God, saith the Lord God.
EZE 35:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 35:2 Thou, son of man, set thy face against the hill [[or mount]] of Seir; and thou shalt prophesy to it,
EZE 35:3 and shalt say to it, The Lord God saith these things, Thou hill [[or mount]] of Seir, lo! I to thee; I shall stretch forth mine hand on thee, and I shall give thee desolate and forsaken.
EZE 35:4 I shall destroy thy cities, and thou shalt be forsaken; and thou shalt know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 35:5 For thou were an enemy everlasting, and enclosedest together the sons of Israel into the hands of sword, in the time of their torment, in the time of the last wickedness;
EZE 35:6 therefore I live, saith the Lord God, for I shall give thee to blood, and blood shall pursue thee; and sith thou hatedest not blood, blood shall pursue thee.
EZE 35:7 And I shall give the hill of Seir desolate and forsaken, and I shall take away from it a goer and a comer-again;
EZE 35:8 and I shall fill the hills thereof with the carrions of their slain men. Men slain by sword shall fall down in thy little hills, and in thy valleys, and in thy strands [[or running brooks]].
EZE 35:9 I shall give thee into everlasting wildernesses, and thy cities shall not be inhabited; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord God.
EZE 35:10 For thou saidest, Two folks and two lands shall be mine, and I shall wield those [[or them]] by heritage, when the Lord was there;
EZE 35:11 therefore I live, saith the Lord God, for I shall do by thy wrath, and by thine envy, which thou didest, hating them, and I shall be made known by them, when I shall deem thee;
EZE 35:12 and thou shalt know, that I am the Lord. I heard all thy shames, which thou spakest of the hills [[or mountains]] of Israel, and saidest, The hills of Israel be forsaken, and be given to us, for to devour.
EZE 35:13 And ye have risen on me with your mouth, and ye have depraved, [[or spoken evil]], against me; I heard your words.
EZE 35:14 The Lord God saith these things, While all the land is glad, I shall turn thee into wilderness.
EZE 35:15 As thou haddest joy on the heritage of the house of Israel, for it was destroyed, so I shall do to thee; the hill of Seir shall be destroyed, and all Idumea; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 36:1 Forsooth thou, son of man, prophesy on the hills [[or mountains]] of Israel; and thou shalt say, Hills of Israel, hear ye the word of the Lord.
EZE 36:2 The Lord God saith these things, For that that the enemy said of you, Well! everlasting highnesses be given to us into heritage;
EZE 36:3 therefore prophesy thou, and say, The Lord God saith these things, For that that ye be made desolate, and defouled by compass, and be made into heritage to other folks, and ye ascended [[or went up]] on the lip of tongue, and on the shame of people;
EZE 36:4 therefore, hills of Israel, hear ye the word of the Lord God. The Lord God saith these things to the mountains, and little hills, to strands [[or streams]], and to valleys, and to pieces of walls left, and to cities forsaken, that be made bare of peoples, and be scorned of other folks by compass.
EZE 36:5 therefore the Lord God saith these things, For in the fire of my fervor I spake of other folks, and of all Idumea, that gave my land into heritage to themselves with joy and all [[the]] heart, and of intent, and casted out it, to destroy it;
EZE 36:6 therefore prophesy thou on the earth of Israel, and thou shalt say to mountains, and little hills, to the highness of hills, and to valleys, The Lord God saith these things, For that that ye be desolate, lo! I spake in my fervor and in my strong vengeance. For that that ye suffered shame of heathen men;
EZE 36:7 therefore the Lord God saith these things, Lo! I raised mine hand against heathen men, that be in your compass, that they bear their shame.
EZE 36:8 Forsooth, ye hills of Israel, bring forth your branches, and bring ye fruit to my people Israel; for it is nigh that it come.
EZE 36:9 For lo! I to you, and I shall turn to you, and ye shall be eared, and shall take seed.
EZE 36:10 And in you I shall multiply men, and all the house of Israel; and cities shall be inhabited, and ruinous things shall be repaired.
EZE 36:11 And I shall fill you with men and beasts, and they shall be multiplied, and shall increase; and I shall make you to dwell as at the beginning, and I shall reward with more goods than ye had at the beginning; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 36:12 And I shall bring men on you, my people Israel, and by heritage they shall wield thee, and thou shalt be to them into heritage; and thou shalt no more lay to, that thou be without them.
EZE 36:13 The Lord God saith these things, For that that they say of you, Thou art a devouress of men, and stranglest thy folk;
EZE 36:14 therefore thou shalt no more eat men, and thou shalt no more slay thy folk, saith the Lord God.
EZE 36:15 And I shall no more make heard in thee the shame of heathen men, and thou shalt no more bear the shame of peoples, and thou shalt no more lose thy folk, saith the Lord God.
EZE 36:16 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 36:17 Thou, son of man, the house of Israel dwelled in their land, and they defouled it in their ways, and in their studies; by the uncleanness of a woman in rotten blood the way of them is made before me.
EZE 36:18 And I shedded out mine indignation on them, for [[the]] blood which they shedded on the land, and in their idols they defouled it.
EZE 36:19 And I scattered them among heathen men, and they were winnowed into lands; I deemed them by the ways and findings of them.
EZE 36:20 And they entered to heathen men, to which they entered, and defouled mine holy name, when it was said to them, This is the people of the Lord, and they went out of the land of him.
EZE 36:21 And I spared them for the sake of mine holy name, which the house of Israel had defouled among heathen men, to which they entered.
EZE 36:22 Therefore thou shalt say to the house of Israel, The Lord God saith these things, O! ye house of Israel, not for you I shall do, but for mine holy name, which ye defouled among heathen men, to which ye entered.
EZE 36:23 And I shall hallow my great name, which is defouled among heathen men, which ye defouled in the midst of them; that heathen men know, that I am the Lord, saith the Lord of hosts, when I shall be hallowed in you before them.
EZE 36:24 For I shall take away you from heathen men, and I shall gather you from all lands, and I shall bring you into your land.
EZE 36:25 And I shall pour out clean water [[up]] on you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your filths; and I shall cleanse you from all your idols.
EZE 36:26 And I shall give to you a new heart, and I shall set a new spirit in the midst of you; and I shall do away an heart of stone from your flesh, and I shall give to you an heart of flesh,
EZE 36:27 and I shall set my spirit in the midst of you. And I shall make that ye go in my commandments, and [[that ye]] keep and work my dooms.
EZE 36:28 And ye shall dwell in the land, which I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be into a people to me, and I shall be into God to you.
EZE 36:29 And I shall save you from all your filths; and I shall call wheat, and I shall multiply it, and I shall not put hunger on you.
EZE 36:30 And I shall multiply the fruit of tree, and the seeds of the field, that ye bear no more the shame of hunger among heathen men.
EZE 36:31 And ye shall have mind on your worst ways, and on studies not good; and your wickednesses, and your great trespasses, shall displease you.
EZE 36:32 Not for you I shall do, saith the Lord God, be it known to you; O! the house of Israel, be ye shamed, and be ashamed on your ways.
EZE 36:33 The Lord God saith these things, In the day in which I shall cleanse you from all your wickednesses, and I shall make cities to be inhabited, and I shall repair ruinous things,
EZE 36:34 and the desert land shall be tilled, that was sometime desolate, before the eyes of each way-goer,
EZE 36:35 they shall say, That land untilled is made as a garden of liking, and cities that forsaken and destitute and undermined sat, now be made strong;
EZE 36:36 and heathen men, which ever be left in your compass, shall know, that I the Lord have builded [[the]] destroyed things, and I have planted untilled things; I the Lord spake, and I did.
EZE 36:37 The Lord God saith these things, Yet in this thing the house of Israel shall find me, that I do to them; I shall multiply them as the flock of men,
EZE 36:38 as an holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in the solemnities thereof, so the cities that be forsaken shall be full of the flocks of men; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 37:1 The hand of the Lord was made on me, and led me out in the spirit of the Lord; and he let me go in the midst of a field that was full of bones;
EZE 37:2 and he led me about by them in compass. Forsooth those [[or there]] were full many on the face of the field, and dry greatly.
EZE 37:3 And he said to me, Guessest thou, son of man, whether these bones shall live? And I said, Lord God, thou knowest.
EZE 37:4 And he said to me, Prophesy thou of these bones; and thou shalt say to them, Ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord.
EZE 37:5 The Lord God saith these things to these bones, Lo! I shall send into you a spirit, and ye shall live.
EZE 37:6 And I shall give sinews on you, and I shall make fleshes to wax on you, and I shall stretch forth above skin in you, and I shall give a spirit to you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 37:7 And I prophesied, as he com-manded to me; forsooth a sound was made, while I prophesied, and lo! a stirring together, and bones came to bones, each to his jointure.
EZE 37:8 And I saw, and lo! sinews and fleshes waxed upon those [[or them]], and skin was stretched forth above in them, and those [[or they]] had no spirit.
EZE 37:9 And he said to me, Prophesy thou to the spirit, prophesy thou, son of man; and thou shalt say to the spirit, The Lord God saith these things, Come, thou spirit, from four winds, and blow thou on these slain men, and live they again.
EZE 37:10 And I prophesied, as he com-manded to me; and the spirit entered into those bones, and they lived, and stood on their feet, a full great host.
EZE 37:11 And the Lord said to me, Thou, son of man, all these bones is the house of Israel; they say, Our bones dried, and our hope perished, and we be cut away.
EZE 37:12 Therefore prophesy thou, and thou shalt say to them, The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall open your graves, and I shall lead you out of your sepulchres, my people, and I shall lead you into your land [[of]] Israel.
EZE 37:13 And ye shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall open your sepulchres, and shall lead you out of your burials, my people;
EZE 37:14 and I shall give my spirit in you, and ye shall live. And I shall make you for to rest on your land; and ye shall know, that I the Lord spake, and did, saith the Lord God.
EZE 37:15 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 37:16 And thou, son of man, take to thee one stick, and write thou on it, To Judah, and to the sons of Israel, and to his fellows. And take thou another stick, and write on it, Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and of all the house of Israel, and of his fellows.
EZE 37:17 And join thou those sticks one to the tother into one stick to thee; and those [[or they]] shall be into onement in thine hand.
EZE 37:18 Soothly when the sons of thy people that speak, shall say to thee, Whether thou showest not to us, what thou wilt to thee in these things?
EZE 37:19 thou shalt speak to them, The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the lineages of Israel, that be joined to him, and I shall give them together with the stick of Judah; and I shall make them into one stick, and they shall be one in the hand of him.
EZE 37:20 Soothly the sticks on which thou hast written, shall be in thine hand before the eyes of them.
EZE 37:21 And thou shalt say to them, The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I shall take the sons of Israel from the midst of nations, to which they went forth; and I shall gather them together on each side. And I shall bring them to their land,
EZE 37:22 and I shall make them one folk in the land, in the hills of Israel, and one king shall be commanding to all; and they shall no more be two folks, and they shall no more be parted into two realms.
EZE 37:23 And they shall no more be defouled in their idols, and their abominations, and in all their wicked-nesses. And I shall make them safe from all their seats, in which they sinned, and I shall cleanse them; and they shall be a people to me, and I shall be God to them.
EZE 37:24 And my servant David shall be king on them, and one shepherd shall be of all them; they shall go in my dooms, and they shall keep my commandments, and shall do those [[or them]].
EZE 37:25 And they shall dwell on the land, which I gave to my servant Jacob, in which your fathers dwelled; and they shall dwell on that land, they, and the sons of them, and the sons of their sons, till into without end; and David, my servant, shall be the prince of them without end.
EZE 37:26 And I shall smite to them a bond of peace; it shall be a covenant ever-lasting to them, and I shall ‘found’ them, and I shall multiply [[them]], and I shall give mine hallowing in the midst of them without end.
EZE 37:27 And my tabernacle shall be among them, and I shall be God to them, and they shall be a people to me.
EZE 37:28 And heathen men shall know, that I am the Lord, hallower of Israel, when mine hallowing shall be in the midst of them without end.
EZE 38:1 And the word of the Lord was made to me, and he said,
EZE 38:2 Thou, son of man, set thy face against Gog, and against the land of Magog, the prince of the head of Meshech and of Tubal; and prophesy thou of him.
EZE 38:3 And thou shalt say to him, The Lord God saith these things, A! Gog, lo! I to thee, prince of the head of Meshech and of Tubal;
EZE 38:4 and I shall lead thee about, and I shall set [[or put]] a bridle in thy cheeks, and I shall lead out thee, and all thine host, horses, and horsemen, all clothed with habergeons, a great multitude of men, taking spear, and shield, and sword.
EZE 38:5 Persians, Ethiopians, and Libyans with them, all be arrayed with shields and helmets.
EZE 38:6 Gomer, and all the companies of him, the house of Togarmah, the sides of the north, and all the host thereof, and many peoples be with thee.
EZE 38:7 Make ready, and array thee, and all thy multitude which is gathered to thee, and be thou into commandment to them.
EZE 38:8 After many days thou shalt be visited; in the last of years thou shalt come to the land, that [[is]] turned again from sword, and was gathered of many peoples, to the hills of Israel, that were desert full oft; this was led out of peoples, and all men dwelled trustily therein.
EZE 38:9 Forsooth thou shalt ascend [[or go up]], and shalt come as a tempest, and as a cloud, for to cover the land, thou, and all thy companies, and many peoples with thee.
EZE 38:10 The Lord God saith these things, In that day, words shall ascend [[or go up]] on thine heart, and thou shalt think the worst thought;
EZE 38:11 and shalt say, I shall go up to the land without walls, I shall come to them that rest, and dwell securely; all these dwell without walls, bars, [[or locks]], and gates be not to them;
EZE 38:12 that thou ravish spoils, and assail prey; that thou bring in thine hand on them that were forsaken, and afterward restored, and on the people which is gathered of heathen men, that began to wield, and to be inhabiter of the navel of [[the]] earth.
EZE 38:13 Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, and all the lions thereof, shall say to thee, Whether thou comest to take spoils? Lo! to ravish prey thou hast gathered thy multitude, that thou take away gold and silver, and do away appurtenance of household and cattle, and that thou ravish preys without number.
EZE 38:14 Therefore prophesy thou, son of man; and thou shalt say to Gog, The Lord God saith these things, Whether not in that day, when my people Israel shall dwell trustily, thou shalt know;
EZE 38:15 and shalt come from thy place, from the sides of the north, thou, and many peoples with thee, all riders of horses, a great company, and an huge host;
EZE 38:16 and thou as a cloud shalt ascend [[or go up] [up]] on my people Israel, that thou cover the earth? Thou shalt be in the last days, and I shall bring thee on my land, that my folks know, when I shall be hallowed in thee, thou Gog, before the eyes of them.
EZE 38:17 The Lord God saith these things, Therefore thou art he of whom I spake in eld [[or old]] days, in the hand of my servants, prophets of Israel, that prophesied in the days of those times, that I should bring thee on them.
EZE 38:18 And it shall be, in that day, in the day of the coming of Gog on the land of Israel, saith the Lord God, mine indignation shall ascend [[or go up]] in my strong vengeance,
EZE 38:19 and in my fervor; I spake in the fire of my wrath. For in that day shall be great earth-moving on the land of Israel;
EZE 38:20 and fishes of the sea, and beasts of [[the]] earth, and birds of the air, and each creeping beast which is moved on earth, and all men that be on the face of [[the]] earth, shall be moved from my face; and hills shall be under-turned, and hedges shall fall down, and each wall shall fall down into the earth.
EZE 38:21 And I shall call together a sword against him in all mine hills, saith the Lord God; the sword of each man shall be dressed against his brother.
EZE 38:22 And then I shall deem him by pestilence, and blood, and great rain, and by great stones; I shall rain fire and brimstone on him, and on his host, and on many peoples that be with him.
EZE 38:23 And I shall be magnified, and shall be hallowed, and I shall be known before the eyes of many folks; and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
EZE 39:1 But prophesy thou, son of man, against Gog; and thou shalt say, The Lord God saith these things, Lo! I on thee, thou Gog, prince of the head of Meshech and of Tubal.
EZE 39:2 And I shall lead thee about, and I shall deceive thee, and I shall make thee to go up from the sides of the north, and I shall bring thee on the hills of Israel.
EZE 39:3 And I shall smite thy bow in thy left hand, and I shall cast down thine arrows from thy right hand.
EZE 39:4 Thou shalt fall down on the hills of Israel, thou, and all thy companies, and peoples that be with thee; I gave thee for to be devoured to wild beasts, to birds, and to each volatile, and to the beasts of the earth.
EZE 39:5 Thou shalt fall down on the face of the field; for I the Lord have spoken, saith the Lord God.
EZE 39:6 And I shall send fire in Magog, and in them that dwell trustily in isles; and they shall know, that I am the Lord God of Israel.
EZE 39:7 And I shall make mine holy name known in the midst of my people Israel, and I shall no more let them defoul mine holy name; and heathen men shall know, that I am the Lord God, the Holy of Israel.
EZE 39:8 Lo! it cometh, and it is done, saith the Lord God. This is the day of which I spake.
EZE 39:9 And dwellers shall go out of the cities of Israel, and they shall set afire, and shall burn arms, shield and spear, bow and arrows, and staves of hand, and shafts without iron; and they shall burn those [[or them]] in fire by seven years.
EZE 39:10 And they shall not bear trees of countries, neither shall cut down of [[the]] forests, for they shall burn arms by fire; and they shall take preys of them, to whom they were preys, and they shall ravish their wasters, saith the Lord God.
EZE 39:11 And it shall be in that day, I shall give to Gog a named place, a sepulchre in Israel, the valley of way-goers at the east of the sea, that shall make them that pass forth for to wonder; and they shall bury there Gog, and all the multitude of him, and it shall be called The valley of the multitude of Gog.
EZE 39:12 And the house of Israel shall bury them, that they cleanse the land in seven months.
EZE 39:13 Forsooth all the people of the land shall bury them, and it shall be a named day to them, in which I am glorified, saith the Lord God.
EZE 39:14 And they shall ordain busily men compassing the land, that shall bury and seek them that were left on the face of the land, that they cleanse it. Forsooth after seven months they shall begin to seek,
EZE 39:15 and they shall compass going about the land; and when they shall see the bone of a man, they shall set a title, or a notable sign, beside it, till the buriers of carrions bury it in the valley of the multitude of Gog.
EZE 39:16 Soothly the name of the city is Hamonah; and they shall cleanse the land.
EZE 39:17 Forsooth, thou, son of man, the Lord God saith these things, Say thou to each bird, and to all fowls, and to all beasts of the field, Come ye together, and haste ye, run ye to-gether on each side to my sacrifice, which I slay to you, a great sacrifice on the hills of Israel, that ye eat fleshes, and drink blood.
EZE 39:18 Ye shall eat the fleshes of strong men, and ye shall drink the blood of princes of earth, of wethers, of lambs, and of bucks of goats, and of bulls, and of beasts made fat, and of all fat things.
EZE 39:19 And ye shall eat the inner fatness into fullness, and ye shall drink the blood into drunkenness, of the sacrifice which I shall slay to you.
EZE 39:20 And ye shall be filled on my board, of horse, and of strong horse-man, [[or knight]], and of all men warriors, saith the Lord God.
EZE 39:21 And I shall set my glory among heathen men, and all heathen men shall see my doom, which I have done, and mine hand, which I have set [[or put]] on them.
EZE 39:22 And the house of Israel shall know, that I am their Lord God, from that day and afterward.
EZE 39:23 And heathen men shall know, that the house of Israel is taken in their wickedness, for that that they forsook me; and I hid my face from them, and I betook them into the hands of enemies, and all they fell down by sword.
EZE 39:24 By the uncleanness and great trespass of them I did to them, and I hid my face from them.
EZE 39:25 Therefore the Lord God saith these things, Now I shall lead again the captivity of Jacob, and I shall have mercy on all the house of Israel; and I shall take fervor for mine holy name.
EZE 39:26 And they shall bear their shame, and all their trespassing by which they trespassed against me, when they dwelled in their land trustily, and dreaded no man;
EZE 39:27 and when I shall bring them again from peoples, and shall gather [[them]] from the lands of their enemies, and shall be hallowed in them, before the eyes of full many folks.
EZE 39:28 And they shall know, that I am the Lord God of them, for that I translated them into nations, and have gathered them on their land, and I left not any of them there.
EZE 39:29 And I shall no more hide my face from them, for I have shed out my spirit on all the house of Israel, saith the Lord God.
EZE 40:1 In the five and twentieth year of our passing over, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, in this same day the hand of the Lord was made on me, and he brought me thither
EZE 40:2 in the revelations of God. And he brought me into the land of Israel, and he let me down on a full high hill, on which was as the building of a city going to the south;
EZE 40:3 and he led me in thither. And lo! a man, whose likeness was as the likeness of brass, and a cord of flax was in his hand, and a reed of measure in his hand; forsooth he stood in the gate.
EZE 40:4 And the same man spake to me, Thou, son of man, see with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart on all things which I shall show to thee, for thou art brought hither that those [[or it]] be showed to thee; tell thou all things which thou seest to the house of Israel.
EZE 40:5 And lo! a wall withoutforth, in the compass of the house of the Lord on each side; and in the hand of the man was a reed of measure of six cubits and a span, that is, an hand-breadth; and he meted the breadth of the building with one reed, and the highness by one reed.
EZE 40:6 And he came to the gate that beheld the way of the east, and he ascended [[or went up]] by [[the]] degrees of it; and he meted the lintel of the gate, by one reed the breadth, that is, one lintel by one reed in breadth;
EZE 40:7 and he meted one little chamber by one reed in length, and by one reed in breadth, and five cubits betwixt the little chambers; and he meted the lintel of the gate beside the porch of the gate within, by one reed.
EZE 40:8 (This verse omitted in the original text.)
EZE 40:9 And he meted the porch of the gate of eight cubits, and the posts thereof by two cubits; soothly the porch of the gate was within.
EZE 40:10 Certainly the chambers of the gate at the way of the east were three on this side, and three on that side; one measure of three, and one measure of the posts on ever either side.
EZE 40:11 And he meted the breadth of the lintel of the gate of ten cubits, and the length of the gate of thirteen cubits.
EZE 40:12 And he meted a margin of one cubit before the chambers, and one cubit was the end on each side; forsooth the chambers were of six cubits on this side and on that side.
EZE 40:13 And he meted the gate from the roof of the chamber till to the roof thereof, the breadth of five and twenty cubits, a door against a door.
EZE 40:14 And he made posts by sixty cubits, and at the post a foreyard of the gate on each side by compass;
EZE 40:15 and before the face of the gate that stretcheth forth till to the face of the porch of the inner gate, he meted fifty cubits.
EZE 40:16 And he meted windows narrow without and large within, in the chambers, and posts of those [[or them]], that were within the gate on each side by compass. Soothly in like manner also windows were in the porches by compass within; and the painture of palm trees was engraved before the posts.
EZE 40:17 And he led me out to the outer-more foreyard, and lo! treasuries, and a pavement arrayed with stone in the foreyard by compass; thirty treasuries were in the compass of the pavement;
EZE 40:18 and the pavement was beneath in the front of the gates, by the length of the gates.
EZE 40:19 And he meted the breadth from the face of the lower gate till to the front of the inner foreyard without-forth, an hundred cubits at the east, and at the north.
EZE 40:20 And he meted, both in length and in breadth, the gate that beheld the way of the north, of the outermore foreyard.
EZE 40:21 And he meted the chambers thereof, three on this side, and three on that side, and the posts thereof, and the porch thereof, by the measure of the former gate; the length thereof of fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof of five and twenty cubits.
EZE 40:22 Soothly the windows thereof, and the porch, and the engravings, were by the measure of the gate that beheld to the east; and the ascending [[or going up]] thereof was of seven degrees, and a porch was before it.
EZE 40:23 And the gate of the inner foreyard was against the gate of the north, and against the east side; and he meted from the gate till to the gate, an hundred cubits.
EZE 40:24 And he led me out to the way of the south, and lo! the gate that beheld to the south; and he meted the posts thereof, and the porch thereof, by the former measures;
EZE 40:25 and the windows thereof, and the porch in compass, as [[the]] other windows; the length of fifty cubits, and the breadth of five and twenty cubits.
EZE 40:26 And by seven degrees men ascended to it, and a porch was before the gates thereof; and palm trees were engraved, one in this side, and another in that side, in the posts thereof.
EZE 40:27 And the gate of the inner foreyard was in the way of the south; and he meted from the gate till to the gate in the way of the south, an hundred cubits.
EZE 40:28 And he led me into the inner foreyard, to the south gate; and he meted the gate by the former measures;
EZE 40:29 the chamber[[s]] thereof, and the posts thereof, and the porch thereof by the same measures; and he meted the windows thereof, and the porch thereof in compass; fifty cubits of length, and five and twenty cubits of breadth.
EZE 40:30 And he meted the porch by com-pass, the length of five and twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof of five cubits.
EZE 40:31 And the porch thereof was to the outermore foreyard, and the palm trees thereof in the posts; and eight degrees were, by which men ascended through it [[or went up thereby]].
EZE 40:32 And he led me into the inner foreyard, by the east way; and he meted the gate by the former measures;
EZE 40:33 the chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the porches thereof, as above; and he meted the windows thereof, and the porches thereof in compass; the length of fifty cubits, and the breadth of five and twenty cubits;
EZE 40:34 and the porch thereof, that is, of the outermore foreyard; and palm trees engraved in the posts thereof, on this side and on that side; and in eight degrees was the ascending [[or the going up]] thereof.
EZE 40:35 And he led me in to the gate that beheld to the north; and he meted by the former measures;
EZE 40:36 the chamber[[s]] thereof, and the posts thereof, and the porch thereof, and the windows thereof by compass; the length of fifty cubits, and the breadth of five and twenty cubits.
EZE 40:37 The porch thereof beheld to the outermore foreyard; and the engraving of palm trees was in the posts thereof, on this side and on that side; and in eight degrees was the ascending [[or the going up]] thereof.
EZE 40:38 And by all chambers a door was in the posts of gates; and there they washed burnt sacrifice.
EZE 40:39 And in the porch of the gate were two boards on this side, and two boards on that side, that burnt sacrifice be offered on those [[or them]], both for sin and for trespass.
EZE 40:40 And at the outermore side, which ascendeth [[or goeth up]] to the door of the gate that goeth to the north, were two boards; and at the tother side, before the porch of the gate, were two boards.
EZE 40:41 Four boards on this side, and four boards on that side; by the sides of the gate were eight boards, on which they offered the sacrifices.
EZE 40:42 Forsooth four boards to burnt sacrifice were builded of square stones, in the length of one cubit and an half, and in the breadth of one cubit and an half, and in the height of one cubit; on which boards they shall set [[or put]] vessels, in which burnt sacrifice and slain sacrifice is offered.
EZE 40:43 And the brinks of the boards be of an handbreadth, and be bowed again within by compass; forsooth on the boards were fleshes of offering.
EZE 40:44 And without the inner gate were chambers of chanters, in the inner foreyard, that was in the side of the gate beholding to the north; and the faces of those [[or them]]were against the south way; one of the side of the east gate, that beheld to the way of the north.
EZE 40:45 And he said to me, This chamber, that beholdeth the south way, is of the priests that wake in the keepings of the temple.
EZE 40:46 Soothly the chamber, that beholdeth to the way of the north, shall be of the priests that wake to the service of the altar; these be the sons of Zadok, which of the sons of Levi nigh to the Lord, for to minister to him.
EZE 40:47 And he meted the foreyard, the length of an hundred cubits, and the breadth of an hundred cubits, by square, and the altar was before the face of the temple.
EZE 40:48 And he led me into the porch of the temple; and he meted the porch by five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side; and he meted the breadth of the gate, of three cubits on this side, and of three cubits on that side.
EZE 40:49 But he meted the length of the porch of twenty cubits, and the breadth of eleven cubits, and by eight degrees men ascended to it; and pillars were in the posts, one on this side, and another on that side.
EZE 41:1 And he led me into the temple, and he meted the posts, six cubits of breadth on this side, and six cubits of breadth on that side, the breadth of the tabernacle.
EZE 41:2 And the breadth of the gate was of ten cubits; and he meted the sides of the gate by five cubits on this side, and by five cubits on that side; and he meted the length thereof by forty cubits, and the breadth of twenty cubits.
EZE 41:3 And he entered within, and he meted in the post of the gate, two cubits; and he meted the gate of six cubits, and the breadth of the gate of seven cubits.
EZE 41:4 And he meted the length thereof of twenty cubits, and the breadth of twenty cubits, before the face of the temple. And he said to me, This is the holy thing of holy things.
EZE 41:5 And he meted the wall of the house of the Lord of six cubits, and the breadth of the side chambers of four cubits, on each side by compass of the house.
EZE 41:6 Forsooth the sides were twice three and thirty, the side to the side; and those [[or they]] were standing on high, that entered by the wall of the house, in those sides by compass, that those [[or they]] held together, and touched not the wall of the temple.
EZE 41:7 And a street was in round, and went upward by a vice, and bare into the solar of the temple by compass; therefore the temple was broader in the higher things; and so from the lower things men ascended to the higher things, and into the midst.
EZE 41:8 And I saw in the house an highness by compass, the sides founded at the measure of a reed in the space of six cubits;
EZE 41:9 and the breadth of the wall of the side withoutforth, of five cubits; and the inner house was in the sides of the house.
EZE 41:10 And betwixt chambers I saw the breadth of twenty cubits in the compass of the house on each side;
EZE 41:11 and I saw the doors of the side to prayer; one door to the way of the north, and one door to the way of the south; and I saw the breadth of place to prayer, of five cubits in compass.
EZE 41:12 And the building that was joined to the place separated, and turned to the way beholding to the sea, of the breadth of seventy cubits; soothly the wall of the building of five cubits of breadth by compass, and the length thereof of ninety cubits.
EZE 41:13 And he meted the length of the house, of an hundred cubits; and that place that was separated, and the building, and the walls thereof, of the length of an hundred cubits.
EZE 41:14 Forsooth the breadth of the street before the face of the house, and of that place that was separated against the east, was of an hundred cubits.
EZE 41:15 And he meted the length of the building against the face of that place that was separated at the back; he meted the buttresses on ever either side, of an hundred cubits. And he meted the inner temple, and the porches of the foreyard,
EZE 41:16 lintels, and windows narrow with-outforth and broad within; buttresses in compass by three parts, against the lintel of each, and arrayed with wood by compass all about; soothly from the earth till to the windows, and the windows were enclosed
EZE 41:17 on the doors, and till to the inner house, and withoutforth by all the walls in compass, within and without-forth at measure.
EZE 41:18 And cherubims and palm trees were made craftily, and there was a palm tree betwixt cherub and cherub; and each cherub had two faces,
EZE 41:19 so that the face of a man was beside the palm tree on this side, and the face of a lion expressed beside the palm tree on the tother side. By all the house in compass,
EZE 41:20 from the earth till to the higher part, cherubims and palm trees were engraved in the walls of the temple.
EZE 41:21 A threshold was four-cornered; and the face of the beholding of the saintuary was over against the beholding of the altar of wood;
EZE 41:22 the height thereof was of three cubits, and the length thereof two cubits; and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and the walls thereof, were of wood. And he spake to me, This is the board before the Lord.
EZE 41:23 And two doors were in the temple, and in the saintuary.
EZE 41:24 And in the two doors on ever either side were two little doors, that were folded together in themselves; for why two doors were on ever either side of the doors.
EZE 41:25 And the cherubims, and the engraving of palm trees, were engraved in the doors of the temple, as also those [[or they]] were expressed in the walls. Wherefore and greater beams were in the front of the porch with-outforth,
EZE 41:26 on which the windows narrow without and large within, and the likeness of palm trees were on this side and on that side; in the little shoulders, either undersettings, of the porch, by the sides of the house, and by the breadth of the walls.
EZE 42:1 And he led me out into the outermore foreyard, by the way leading to the north; and he led me into the chamber, that was against the building separated, and against the house going to the north;
EZE 42:2 in the face, an hundred cubits of length of the side of the door of the north, and fifty cubits of breadth,
EZE 42:3 over against twenty cubits of the inner foreyard, and over against the pavement arrayed with stone of the outermore foreyard, where a porch was joined to a three-fold porch.
EZE 42:4 And before the chambers was a walking place of ten cubits of breadth, beholding to the inner things of the way of one hundred cubits. And the doors of those [[or them]] to the north,
EZE 42:5 where chambers were lower in the higher things; for those [[or they]] bare up the porches that appeared on high of those [[or them]] from the lower things, and from the middle things of the building.
EZE 42:6 For those were of three stages, and had not pillars, as were the pillars of [[the]] foreyards; therefore those [[or they]] stood on high from the lower things, and from the middle things from [[the]] earth, by fifty cubits.
EZE 42:7 And the outermore hall enclosing the walking place was by the chambers, that were in the way of the outermore foreyard, before the chambers; the length thereof was of fifty cubits.
EZE 42:8 For the length of the chambers of the outermore foreyard was of fifty cubits, and the length before the face of the temple was of an hundred cubits.
EZE 42:9 And under these chambers was an entering from the east, of men entering into those, from the outer-more foreyard,
EZE 42:10 in the breadth of the wall of the foreyard that was over against the east way, into the face of the building separated. And chambers were before the building,
EZE 42:11 and a way was before the face of those [[or them]], by the likeness of chambers that were in the way of the north; by the length of those [[or them]], so was also the breadth of those [[or them]]. And all the entering of those [[or them]], and the likenesses and the doors of those [[or them]],
EZE 42:12 were like the doors of chambers that were in the way beholding to the south; a door was in the head of the way, which way was before the porch separated to men entering by the east way.
EZE 42:13 And he said to me, The chambers of the north, and the chambers of the south, that be before the building separated, these be holy chambers, in which the priests be clothed, that nigh to the Lord into the holy of holy things; there they shall put the holy of holy things, and offerings for sin, and for trespass; for it is an holy place.
EZE 42:14 Soothly when priests have entered, they shall not go out of holy things into the outermore foreyard; and there they shall put up their clothes in which they minister, for those [[or they]] be holy; and they shall be clothed in other clothes, and so they shall go forth to the people.
EZE 42:15 And when he had filled the measures of the inner house, he led me out by the way of the gate that beheld to the east way; and he meted it on each side by compass.
EZE 42:16 Forsooth he meted against the east wind with the reed of measure, by compass five hundred reeds [[or five hundred rods]], in a reed of measure by compass.
EZE 42:17 And he meted against the wind of the north five hundred reeds [[or five hundred rods]], in the reed of measure by compass.
EZE 42:18 And at the south wind he meted five hundred reeds [[or five hundred rods]], with a reed of measure by compass.
EZE 42:19 And at the west wind he meted five hundred reeds [[or five hundred rods]], with the reed of measure.
EZE 42:20 By four winds he meted the wall thereof on each side by compass, the length of five hundred [[cubits]], and the breadth of five hundred [[cubits]], the wall separating betwixt the saintuary and the place of the common people.
EZE 43:1 And he led me out to the gate, that beheld to the east way.
EZE 43:2 And lo! the glory of God of Israel entered by the east way; and a voice was to it, as the voice of many waters, and the earth shined of the majesty of him.
EZE 43:3 And I saw a vision, by the like-ness which I had seen, when he came to destroy the city; and the likeness was like the beholding which I had seen beside the flood Chebar. And I fell down on my face,
EZE 43:4 and the majesty of the Lord entered into the temple by the way of the gate that beheld to the east.
EZE 43:5 And the Spirit raised me, and led me into the inner foreyard; and lo! the house of the Lord was filled with the glory of the Lord.
EZE 43:6 And I heard one speaking to me out of the house. And the man that stood beside me,
EZE 43:7 said to me, Thou, son of man, this is the place of my seat, and the place of the steps of my feet, where I dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel without end; and the house of Israel shall no more defoul mine holy name, they, and the kings of them, in their fornications, and in the fallings of their kings, and in their high places.
EZE 43:8 Which made their threshold beside my threshold, and their posts beside my posts, and a wall was betwixt me and them; and they defouled mine holy name in abominations which they did; wherefore I wasted them in my wrath.
EZE 43:9 Now therefore put they away far their fornication, and the fallings of their kings from me; and I shall dwell ever in the midst of them.
EZE 43:10 But thou, son of man, show the temple to the house of Israel, and be they ashamed of their wickednesses; and mete they the building,
EZE 43:11 and be they ashamed of all things which they did. Thou shalt show to them, and thou shalt write before the eyes of them the figure of the house, and of the building thereof; the out-goings, and the enterings, and all the describings thereof, and all the com-mandments thereof, and all the order thereof, and all the laws thereof; that they keep all the describings thereof, and commandments thereof, and do those [[or them]].
EZE 43:12 This is the law of the house, in the highness of the hill [[or the mount]]; all the coasts thereof in compass is the holy of holy things; therefore this is the law of the house.
EZE 43:13 Forsooth these be the measures of the altar, in a veriest cubit, that had a cubit and a span; in the bosom there-of was a cubit in length, and a cubit in breadth; and the end thereof till to the brink, and one span in compass; also this was the ditch of the altar.
EZE 43:14 And from the bosom of the earth till to the last height were two cubits, and the breadth of one cubit; and from the less height of the pedestal, till to the greater height of the pedestal, were four cubits, and the breadth was of one cubit;
EZE 43:15 forsooth that ariel, that is, the higher part of the altar, was of four cubits; and from the altar till to above were four horns.
EZE 43:16 And the altar of twelve cubits in length was four-cornered with even sides, by twelve cubits of breadth.
EZE 43:17 And the height of fourteen cubits of length was by fourteen cubits of breadth, in four corners thereof. And a crown of half a cubit was in the compass thereof, and the bosom thereof was of one cubit by compass; forsooth the degrees thereof were turned to the east.
EZE 43:18 And he said to me, Thou, son of man, the Lord God saith these things, These be the customs of the altar, in whatever day it is made, that men offer on it burnt sacrifice, and blood be shed out.
EZE 43:19 And thou shalt give to priests and deacons that be of the seed of Zadok, that nigh to me, saith the Lord God, that they offer to me a calf of the drove for sin.
EZE 43:20 And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and shalt put on four horns thereof, and on four corners of [[the]] height, and on the crown in compass; and thou shalt cleanse it, and [[fully]] make clean.
EZE 43:21 And thou shalt take the calf which is offered for sin, and thou shalt burn it in a separated place of the house, without the saintuary.
EZE 43:22 And in the second day thou shalt offer a buck of goats, which is with-out wem, for sin; and they shall cleanse the altar, as they cleansed it in the calf.
EZE 43:23 And when thou hast [[ful]] filled that cleansing, thou shalt offer a calf of the drove, which calf is without wem, and a wether without wem of the flock.
EZE 43:24 And thou shalt offer those [[or them]] in the sight of the Lord; and priests shall put salt on those [[or them]], and shall offer those [[or them]] into burnt sacrifice to the Lord.
EZE 43:25 By seven days, thou shalt make ready a buck of goats for sin, each day; and they shall offer a calf of the drove, and a wether unwemmed of sheep.
EZE 43:26 By seven days they shall [[fully]] cleanse the altar, and shall make it clean, and they shall [[ful]] fill the hand thereof.
EZE 43:27 Forsooth when seven days be [[ful]] filled, in the eighth day and further, priests shall make on the altar your burnt sacrifices, and those things which they offer for peace; and I shall be pleased to you, saith the Lord God.
EZE 44:1 And he turned me to the way of the gate of the outermore saintuary, which gate beheld to the east, and was closed.
EZE 44:2 And the Lord said to me, This gate shall be closed, and shall not be opened, and a man shall not pass through it; for the Lord God of Israel entered [[in]] by it, and it shall be closed to the prince.
EZE 44:3 The prince himself shall sit therein, that he eat bread before the Lord; he shall go in by the way of the gate of the porch, and he shall go out by the way thereof.
EZE 44:4 And he led me by the way of the north gate, in the sight of the house of the Lord; and I saw, and lo! the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord; and I fell down on my face.
EZE 44:5 And the Lord said to me, Thou, son of man, set thine heart, and see with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all things which I speak to thee, of all the ceremonies of the house of the Lord, and of all the laws thereof; and thou shalt set thine heart in the ways of the temple, by all the goings out of the saintuary.
EZE 44:6 And thou shalt say to the house of Israel stirring me to wrath, The Lord God saith these things, Ye house of Israel, all your great trespasses suffice to you,
EZE 44:7 for ye bring in alien sons, uncir-cumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, that they be in my saintuary, and defoul mine house. And ye offer my loaves, inner fatness, and blood, and break my covenant in all your great trespasses.
EZE 44:8 And ye kept not the command-ments of my saintuary, and ye setted keepers of my keepings in my saintuary to yourselves.
EZE 44:9 The Lord God saith these things, Each alien, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, shall not enter into my saintuary; yea, each alien son, which is in the midst of the sons of Israel.
EZE 44:10 But also [[the]] Levites, [[or deacons]], that went far away from me, in the error of the sons of Israel, and erred from me after their idols, and bare their wickedness,
EZE 44:11 they shall be keepers of [[the]] houses in my saintuary, and porters of gates of the house, and ministers of the house; they shall slay burnt sacrifices, and sacrifices for victory of the people; and they shall stand in the sight of the priests for to minister to them.
EZE 44:12 For that that they ministered to those [[or them]] in the sight of their idols, and were made to the house of Israel into offending, either hurting, of wickedness; therefore I raised mine hand on them, saith the Lord God, and they bare their wickedness.
EZE 44:13 And they shall not nigh to me, that they use priesthood to me, neither they shall nigh to all my saintuary beside [[the]] holy of holy things, but they shall bear their shame, and their great trespasses which they did.
EZE 44:14 And I shall make them porters of the house, in all the service thereof, and in all things that be done therein.
EZE 44:15 Forsooth priests and deacons, the sons of Zadok, that kept the ceremonies of my saintuary, when the sons of Israel erred from me, they shall nigh to me, for to minister to me; and they shall stand in my sight, that they offer to me inner fatness and blood, saith the Lord God.
EZE 44:16 They shall enter into my saintuary, and they shall nigh to my board, that they minister to me, and keep my ceremonies.
EZE 44:17 And when they shall enter into the gates of the inner foreyard, they shall be clothed with linen clothes, neither any woolen thing shall go on them, when they minister in the gates of the inner foreyard, and within;
EZE 44:18 linen caps, either mitres, shall be in the heads of them, and linen breeches shall be in the loins of them, and they shall not be gird in sweat.
EZE 44:19 And when they shall go out at the outermore foreyard to the people, they shall despoil them of their clothes in which they ministered, and they shall lay those [[or them]] up in the chambers of the saintuary; and they shall clothe themselves in other clothes, and they shall not hallow my people in their clothes.
EZE 44:20 Forsooth they shall not shave their head[[s]], neither they shall nurse long hair, but they clipping shall clip their heads.
EZE 44:21 And each priest shall not drink wine, when he shall enter into the inner foreyard.
EZE 44:22 And priests shall not take for wives a widow, and a forsaken woman, but virgins of the seed of the house of Israel; but also they shall take a widow, which is the widow of a priest.
EZE 44:23 And they shall teach my people, what is betwixt holy thing and defouled; and they shall show to them, what is betwixt clean thing and unclean.
EZE 44:24 And when debate is, they shall stand in my dooms, and shall deem by my laws; and they shall keep my commandments in all my solemnities, and they shall hallow my sabbaths.
EZE 44:25 And they shall not enter to a dead man, lest they be defouled; no but to father, and mother, and to son, and daughter, and to brother, and sister that had not an husband, in which they shall be defouled.
EZE 44:26 And after that he is cleansed, seven days shall be numbered to him.
EZE 44:27 And in the day of his entering into the saintuary, to the inner foreyard, that he minister to me in the saintuary, he shall offer for his sin, saith the Lord God.
EZE 44:28 Forsooth none heritage shall be to them, I am the heritage of them; and ye shall not give to them a possession in Israel, for I am the possession of them.
EZE 44:29 They shall eat sacrifice, and that for sin, and that for trespass, and each avow [[or vow]] of Israel shall be theirs.
EZE 44:30 And the first things of all first engendered things, and all moist sacrifices, of all things that be offered, shall be the priests’ part; and ye shall give the first things of your meats to the priest, that he lay up blessing to his house.
EZE 44:31 Priests shall not eat anything dead by itself, and taken of a beast, of fowls, and of sheep.
EZE 45:1 And when ye shall begin to part the land by parts, separate ye the first things to the Lord, an hallowed thing of the land, five and twenty thousand of reeds in length, and ten thousand of reeds in breadth; it shall be hallowed in all the coast thereof by compass.
EZE 45:2 And it shall be hallowed on each part in five hundred reeds, by five hundred, in four sides by compass, and in fifty cubits into the suburbs thereof by compass.
EZE 45:3 And from this measure thou shalt mete the length of five and twenty thousand of reeds, and the breadth of ten thousand; and the temple and the holy of holy things shall be in it.
EZE 45:4 An hallowed thing of the land shall be to priests, the ministers of the saintuary, that nigh to the service of the Lord; and a place shall be to them into houses, and into the saintuary of holiness.
EZE 45:5 Soothly five and twenty thousand of length shall be, and ten thousand of breadth; but the deacons that minister to the house, they shall have in possession twenty chambers.
EZE 45:6 And ye shall give the possession of the city, five thousand reeds of breadth, and five and twenty thousand of length, by the separating of the saintuary, to all the house of Israel.
EZE 45:7 And ye shall give a portion to the prince on this side and on that side, beside the separating of the saintuary, and beside the possession of the city, against the face of separating of the saintuary, and against the face of possession of the city; from the side of the sea till to the sea, and from the side of the east till to the east, shall be of the possession of the prince. Forsooth the length by each of the parts, from the west end till to the east end of the land,
EZE 45:8 shall be possession to him in Israel; and the princes shall no more rob my people, but they shall give the rest of the land to the house of Israel, by the lineages of them.
EZE 45:9 The Lord God saith these things, O! princes of Israel, suffice it to you, leave ye wickedness and raven, and do ye doom and rightfulness; part ye your nigh coasts from my people, saith the Lord God.
EZE 45:10 A just balance, and a just measure[[of dry things]]called ephah, and a just measure[[of flowing things]]called bath, shall be to you.
EZE 45:11 Ephah and bath shall be even, and of one measure, that a bath take the tenth part of the measure called a cor, and that an ephah take the tenth part of the measure called a cor; by the measure of cor shall be even weighing of those [[or them]].
EZE 45:12 Forsooth a shekel shall have twenty halfpence; certainly twenty shekels, and five and twenty shekels, and fifteen shekels make a bezant.
EZE 45:13 And these be the first fruits which ye shall take away; the sixth part of ephah of a cor of wheat, and the sixth part of ephah of a cor of barley.
EZE 45:14 Also the measure of oil; a bath of oil is the tenth part of cor, and ten baths make one cor; for ten baths fill one cor.
EZE 45:15 And one ram, either wether, of the flock of two hundred, of these which the men of Israel nourish, into sacrifice, and into burnt sacrifice, and into peaceable sacrifices, to cleanse for them, saith the Lord God.
EZE 45:16 All the people of the land shall be bound in these first fruits to the prince in Israel.
EZE 45:17 And on the part of the prince shall be burnt sacrifices, and sacrifices, and moist sacrifices, in solemnities, and in calends, either beginnings of months, and in sabbaths, and in all the solemnities of the house of Israel; he shall make ready the sacrifice for sin, and burnt sacrifice, and peaceable sacrifices, to cleanse for the house of Israel.
EZE 45:18 The Lord God saith these things, In the first month, in the first day of the month, thou shalt take a calf without wem of the drove, and thou shalt cleanse the saintuary.
EZE 45:19 And the priest shall take of the blood of the beast that shall be for sin; and he shall put in the posts of the house, and in four corners of the height of the altar, and in the posts of the gate of the inner foreyard.
EZE 45:20 And thus thou shalt do in the seventh day of the month, for each that knew not, and was deceived by error, and thou shalt cleanse for the house.
EZE 45:21 In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, the solemnity of pask shall be to you; therf loaves shall be eaten by seven days.
EZE 45:22 And the prince shall make ready a calf for sin in that day, for himself and for all the people of the land.
EZE 45:23 And in the solemnity of seven days he shall make burnt sacrifice to the Lord; he shall offer seven calves and seven wethers without wem each day, by seven days, and each day a buck of goats, for sin.
EZE 45:24 And he shall make the sacrifice of ephah by a calf, and of ephah by a wether, and of oil the measure hin, by each ephah.
EZE 45:25 In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, in the solemnity, he shall make as those [[or they]] be before-said, by seven days, as well for sin, as for burnt sacrifice, and in sacrifice, and in oil.
EZE 46:1 The Lord God saith these things, The gate of the inner foreyard, that beholdeth to the east, shall be closed six days in which work is done; for it shall be opened in the day of sabbath, but also it shall be opened in the day of calends.
EZE 46:2 And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of the gate without-forth, and he shall stand in the threshold of the gate; and priests shall make the burnt sacrifice of him, and the peaceable sacrifices of him; and he shall worship on the threshold of the gate, and he shall go out; forsooth the gate shall not be closed till to the eventide.
EZE 46:3 And the people of the land shall worship at the door of that gate, in sabbaths, and in calends, before the Lord.
EZE 46:4 Forsooth the prince shall offer this burnt sacrifice to the Lord in the day of sabbath, six lambs without wem, and a wether without wem,
EZE 46:5 and the sacrifice of ephah by a wether; but in the lambs he shall offer the sacrifice which his hand shall give, and of oil the measure hin, by each ephah.
EZE 46:6 But in the day of calends he shall offer a calf without wem of the drove; and six lambs, and wethers shall be without wem,
EZE 46:7 and ephah by a calf. Also he shall make the sacrifice, ephah by a wether; but of lambs as his hand findeth, and of oil the measure hin, by each ephah.
EZE 46:8 And when the prince shall enter, enter he by the way of the porch of the gate, and go he out by the same way.
EZE 46:9 And when the people of the land shall enter in the sight of the Lord into solemnities, which people entereth by the gate of the north for to worship, go it out by the way of the south gate. Certainly the people that entereth by the way of the south gate, go out by the way of the north gate. It shall not turn again by the way of the gate by which it entered, but even against that way it shall go out.
EZE 46:10 Forsooth the prince shall be in the midst of them; he shall enter with them that enter, and he shall go out with them that go out.
EZE 46:11 And in fairs and in solemnities, the sacrifice of ephah shall be by a calf, and ephah by a wether; in lambs shall be sacrifice as his hand findeth, and of oil the measure hin, by each ephah.
EZE 46:12 Forsooth when the prince maketh a willful burnt sacrifice, either willful peaceable sacrifices to the Lord, the gate that beholdeth to the east shall be opened to him; and he shall make his burnt sacrifice, and his peaceable sacrifices, as it is wont to be done in the day of sabbath; and he shall go out, and the gate shall be closed after that he went out.
EZE 46:13 And he shall make burnt sacrifice each day to the Lord, a lamb without wem of the same year; ever he shall make it in the morrowtide,
EZE 46:14 and he shall make sacrifice on it full early; early he shall make the sixth part of ephah, and of oil the third part of hin, that it be meddled [[or mingled]] with the flour of wheat; it is a lawful sacrifice, continual and everlasting, to the Lord.
EZE 46:15 He shall make ready a lamb, and sacrifice, and oil, full early; he shall make ready early [[the]] burnt sacrifice everlasting.
EZE 46:16 The Lord God saith these things, If the prince giveth an house to any of his sons, the heritage of him shall be of his sons; they shall wield it by heritage.
EZE 46:17 Forsooth if he giveth a bequest of his heritage to one of his servants, it shall be his till to the year of remission, and it shall turn again to the prince; forsooth the heritage of him shall be to his sons.
EZE 46:18 And the prince shall not take by violence of the heritage of the people, and of the possession of them; but of his own possession he shall give heritage to his sons, that my people be not scattered, each man from his possession.
EZE 46:19 And he led me in by the entering, that was on the side of the gate, into the chambers of the saintuary to the priests, which chambers beheld to the north; and there was a place going to the west.
EZE 46:20 And he said to me, This is the place where priests shall seethe, both for sin [[of doing]], and for trespass [[of leaving undone]]; where they shall seethe sacrifice, that they bear it not out into the outermore foreyard, and the people be hallowed.
EZE 46:21 And he led me out into the outermore foreyard, and led me about by the four corners of the foreyard; and lo! a little foreyard was in the corner of the foreyard, all little fore-yards by the corners of the foreyard;
EZE 46:22 in four corners of the foreyard little foreyards were disposed, of forty cubits by length, and of thirty by breadth; four were of one measure;
EZE 46:23 and a wall by compass went about four little foreyards; and kitchens were made under the porches by compass.
EZE 46:24 And he said to me, This is the house of kitchens, in which the ministers of the house of the Lord shall seethe the sacrifice of the people.
EZE 47:1 And he turned me to the gate of the house of the Lord; and lo! waters went out from under the threshold of the house to the east; for the face of the house beheld to the east; forsooth the waters came down into the right side of the temple, to the south part of the altar.
EZE 47:2 And he led me out by the way of the north gate, and he turned me to the way without the outermore gate, to the way that beholdeth to the east; and lo! waters flowing from the right side,
EZE 47:3 when the man that had a cord in his hand went out to the east. And he meted a thousand cubits, and led me over through the water till to the heels.
EZE 47:4 And again he meted a thousand, and led me over through the water till to the knees. And again he meted a thousand, and led me over through the water till to the reins.
EZE 47:5 And he meted a thousand, by the strand [[or stream]] which I might not pass [[over]]; for the deep waters of the strand had waxed great, that may not be waded over.
EZE 47:6 And he said to me, Certainly, son of man, thou hast seen. And he led me, and he turned me to the river of the strand [[or stream]].
EZE 47:7 And when I had turned me, lo! in the river of the strand [[or stream]] full many trees on ever either side.
EZE 47:8 And he said to me, These waters that go out to the heaps of sand of the east, and go down into [[the]] plain places of desert, shall enter into the sea, and shall go out; and the waters shall be healed.
EZE 47:9 And each living beast that creep-eth, shall live, whither ever the strand [[or stream]] shall come; and fishes many enough shall be, after that these waters come thither, and [[they]] shall be healed, and shall live; all things to which the strand [[or stream]] shall come, shall live.
EZE 47:10 And fishers shall stand on those waters; from Engedi till to Eneglaim shall be drying of nets; full many kinds of fishes thereof shall be, as the fishes of the great sea, of full great multitude;
EZE 47:11 but in the brinks thereof and in marishes waters shall not be healed, for those [[or they]] shall be given into places of making of salt.
EZE 47:12 And each tree bearing fruit shall grow on the strand [[or stream]], in the rivers thereof on each side; a leaf thereof shall not fall down, and the fruit thereof shall not fail; by all months it shall bear first fruits, for the waters thereof shall go out of the saintuary; and the fruits thereof shall be into meat, and the leaves thereof to medicine.
EZE 47:13 The Lord God saith these things, This is the end, in which ye shall wield the land, in the twelve lineages of Israel; for Joseph hath double part.
EZE 47:14 Forsooth ye shall wield it, each man evenly as his brother; on which I raised mine hand, that I should give to your fathers; and this land shall fall to you into possession.
EZE 47:15 This is the end of the land at the north coast, from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, to men coming to Zedad,
EZE 47:16 Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is in the midst betwixt Damascus and [[the]] nigh coasts of Hamath, to the house of Hatticon, which is beside the ends of Hauran.
EZE 47:17 And the end shall be from the sea till to the porch of Enan, the end of Damascus, and from the north till to the north, the end of Hamath; forsooth this is the north coast.
EZE 47:18 Certainly the east coast from the midst of Hauran, and from the midst of Damascus, and from the midst of Gilead, and from the midst of the land of Israel, is Jordan, parting at the east sea, also ye shall mete the east coast.
EZE 47:19 Forsooth the south coast of midday is from Tamar till to the waters of against-saying of Kadesh; and the strand [[or stream]] till to the great sea, and the south coast of midday.
EZE 47:20 And the coast of the sea is the great sea, from the nigh coast by [[the]] straight, till thou come to Hamath; this is the coast of the sea.
EZE 47:21 And ye shall part this land to you by the lineages of Israel;
EZE 47:22 and ye shall send it into heritage to you, and to comelings that come to you, that engendered sons in the midst of you; and they shall be to you as men born in the land among the sons of Israel; with you they shall part possession, in the midst of the line-ages of Israel.
EZE 47:23 Forsooth in whatever lineage a comeling is, there ye shall give possession to him, saith the Lord God.
EZE 48:1 And these be the names of lineages, from the ends of the north, beside the way [[of]] Hethlon, to men going to Hamath, the porch of Enan, the term of Damascus, to the north beside Hamath; and the east coast shall be to it the sea, one part shall be of Dan.
EZE 48:2 And from the end of Dan, from the east coast till to the coast of the sea, one part shall be of Asher.
EZE 48:3 And on the end of Asher, from the east coast till to the coast of the sea, one of Naphtali.
EZE 48:4 And on the term of Naphtali, from the east coast till to the coast of the sea, one of Manasseh.
EZE 48:5 And on the end of Manasseh, from the east coast till to the coast of the sea, one of Ephraim.
EZE 48:6 And on the end of Ephraim, from the east coast till to the coast of the sea, one of Reuben.
EZE 48:7 And on the end of Reuben, from the east coast till to the coast of the sea, one of Judah.
EZE 48:8 And on the end of Judah, from the east coast till to the coast of the sea, shall be the place of the first fruits, which ye shall set apart by five and twenty thousand reeds of breadth and of length [[or in five and twenty thousand rods of breadth and of length]], as all parts be, from the east coast till to the coast of the sea; and the saintuary shall be in the midst thereof.
EZE 48:9 The place of the first fruits which ye shall set apart to the Lord, the length shall be in five and twenty thousand, and the breadth in ten thousand.
EZE 48:10 Forsooth these shall be the first fruits of the saintuary of priests; to the north five and twenty thousand of length, and to the sea ten thousand of breadth; but to the east ten thousand of breadth, and to the south five and twenty thousand of length; and the saintuary of the Lord shall be in the midst thereof.
EZE 48:11 The saintuary shall be to priests of the sons of Zadok, that kept my ceremonies, and erred not, when the sons of Israel erred, as also [[the]] deacons erred.
EZE 48:12 And this portion of the place of the first fruits shall be to them of the first fruits of the land, the holy of holy things, by the term of Levites, either deacons.
EZE 48:13 But also to deacons in like manner by the coasts of priests shall be five and twenty thousand of length, and ten thousand of breadth; all the length of five and twenty thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand.
EZE 48:14 And they shall not sell thereof, neither shall exchange any part of their portion; and the place of the first fruits of the land shall not be trans-lated, for those [[or they]] be hallowed to the Lord.
EZE 48:15 Soothly the five thousand, that be left over in breadth, by five and twenty thousand, shall be the unholy things, either common things, of the city, into dwelling place, and into suburbs; and the city shall be in the midst thereof.
EZE 48:16 And these shall be the measures thereof; at the north coast, five hundred and four thousand of reeds, and at the south coast, five hundred and four thousand, and at the east coast, five hundred and four thousand, and at the west coast, five hundred and four thousand.
EZE 48:17 Forsooth the suburbs of the city at the north shall be two hundred and fifty, and at the south two hundred and fifty, and at the east two hundred and fifty, and at the sea, that is, the west, two hundred and fifty.
EZE 48:18 But that that is residue in length, by the place of the first fruits of the saintuary, ten thousand into the east, and ten thousand into the west, shall be as the place of the first fruits of the saintuary; and the fruits shall be into loaves to them that serve the city.
EZE 48:19 Forsooth they that serve in the city shall work that land, anyone of all the lineages of Israel.
EZE 48:20 All the place of the first fruits of five and twenty thousand, by five and twenty thousand in square, shall be separated into the place of the first fruits of [[the]] saintuary, and into possession of the city.
EZE 48:21 Forsooth that that is residue, shall be the prince’s part, on each side of the place of the first fruits of [[the]] saintuary, and of the possession of the city, even against five and twenty thousand of the place of the first fruits, till to the east end; but also to the sea even against five and twenty thousand, till to the end of the sea, shall be in like manner in the parts of the prince; and the place of the first fruits of the saintuary, and the saintuary of the temple shall be in the midst of it.
EZE 48:22 Forsooth from the possession of deacons, and from the possession of the city, which is in the midst of parts of the prince, shall be into the term, either portion, of Judah, and into the term, either portion, of Benjamin; and it shall pertain to the prince.
EZE 48:23 And to [[the]] other lineages, from the east coast till to the west coast, one to Benjamin.
EZE 48:24 And against the term, either portion, of Benjamin, from the east coast till to the west coast, one to Simeon.
EZE 48:25 And on the term of Simeon, from the east coast till to the west coast, one to Issachar.
EZE 48:26 And on the term of Issachar, from the east coast till to the west coast, one to Zebulun.
EZE 48:27 And on the term of Zebulun, from the east coast till to the west coast, one to Gad.
EZE 48:28 And on the term of Gad, to the coast of the south into midday, [[or southward]]; and the end shall be from Tamar till to the waters of against-saying of Kadesh, and the heritage against the great sea.
EZE 48:29 This is the land which ye shall send into part to the lineages of Israel, and these be the partings of those [[or them]], saith the Lord God.
EZE 48:30 And these be the goings out of the city; from the north coast thou shalt mete five hundred and four thousand reeds.
EZE 48:31 And [[the]] gates of the city shall be named in all the lineages of Israel, three gates at the north; one gate of Reuben, one gate of Judah, one gate of Levi.
EZE 48:32 And at the east coast, five hundred and four thousand reeds, and three gates; one gate of Joseph, one gate of Benjamin, one gate of Dan.
EZE 48:33 And at the south coast thou shalt mete five hundred and four thousand reeds, and three gates shall be of those [[or them]]; one gate of Simeon, one gate of Issachar, one gate of Zebulun.
EZE 48:34 And at the west coast, five hundred and four thousand reeds, three gates of those [[or them]]; one gate of Gad, one gate of Asher, one gate of Naphtali.
EZE 48:35 By compass eighteen miles; and the name of the city shall be from that day, The Lord is there. Amen.
JOE 1:1 The word of the Lord is this, that was made to Joel, the son of Pethuel.
JOE 1:2 Eld [[or old]] men, hear ye this, and all dwellers of the land, perceive ye with ears. If this thing was done in your days, either in the days of your fathers.
JOE 1:3 Of this thing tell ye to your sons, and your sons tell to their sons, and the sons of them tell to another generation.
JOE 1:4 A locust ate the residue of a wortworm, and a bruchus ate the residue of a locust, and rust ate the residue of a bruchus.
JOE 1:5 Drunken men, wake ye, and weep; and yell ye, all that drink wine in sweetness; for it perished from your mouth.
JOE 1:6 For why a folk strong and unnumberable ascended [[or went up]] on my land. The teeth thereof be as the teeth of a lion, and the cheek teeth thereof be as of a whelp of a lion.
JOE 1:7 It setted my vinery [[or put my vineyard]] into desert, and took away the rind of my fig tree. It made naked and spoiled that vinery, and casted forth; the branches thereof be made white.
JOE 1:8 Wail thou, as a virgin girded with a sackcloth on the husband of her time of marriage.
JOE 1:9 Sacrifice and moist sacrifice perished from the house of the Lord; and priests, the ministers of the Lord, mourned.
JOE 1:10 The country is made bare of people. The earth mourned; for wheat is destroyed. Wine is shamed, and oil was sick, either failed.
JOE 1:11 The earth-tillers be shamed, the vine-tillers yelled on wheat and barley; for the ripe corn of the field is perished.
JOE 1:12 The vinery is shamed [[or the vine-yard is confounded]]; and the fig tree was sick. The pomegranate tree, and the palm tree, and the fir tree, and all the trees of the field dried up; for joy is shamed from the sons of men.
JOE 1:13 Ye priests, gird you, and wail; ye ministers of the altar, yell. Ministers of my God, enter ye, lie ye in sackcloth; for why sacrifice and moist sacrifice perished from the house of your God.
JOE 1:14 Hallow ye fasting, call ye the company, gather ye together eld [[or old]] men, and all dwellers of the earth, into the house of your God; and cry ye to the Lord,
JOE 1:15 A! A! A! to the day; for the day of the Lord is nigh, and shall come as a tempest from the Almighty.
JOE 1:16 Whether foods perished not before your eyes; gladness and full out joy perished from the house of your God?
JOE 1:17 Beasts waxed rotten in their drit. Barns be destroyed, cellars be destroy-ed, for wheat is shamed.
JOE 1:18 Why wailed a beast? why lowed the flocks of oxen and kine? for no pasture is to them; but also the flocks of sheep perished.
JOE 1:19 Lord, I shall cry to thee, for fire ate the fair things of desert, and flame burnt all the trees of the country.
JOE 1:20 But also beasts of the field, as a cornfloor thirsting rain, beheld [[up]] to thee; for the wells of waters be dried up, and fire devoured the fair things of desert.
JOE 2:1 Sing ye with a trump in Zion, yell ye in mine holy hill [[or mountain]]. All the dwellers of earth be disturbed [[or troubled]]; for the day of the Lord cometh,
JOE 2:2 for the day of darknesses and of mist is nigh, the day of cloud and of whirlwind. These locusts be as the morrowtide spread abroad on hills, a much people and strong. None was like it from the beginning, and after it shall not be, till into years of generation and of generation.
JOE 2:3 Before the face thereof shall be fire devouring, and after it shall be burning flame; as a garden of liking or Eden the land shall be before them, and wilderness of desert shall be after them, and none is that shall escape them.
JOE 2:4 The looking of them shall be as the looking of horses; and as horsemen, so they shall run.
JOE 2:5 As the sound of carts on the heads [[or tops]] of hills they shall skip; as the sound of the flame of fire devouring stubble, as a strong people made ready to battle.
JOE 2:6 Peoples shall be tormented of the face thereof, all faces shall be as driven into a pot.
JOE 2:7 As strong men they shall run, as men warriors they shall ascend on the wall. These men shall go in their ways, and they shall not bow away from their paths.
JOE 2:8 Each man shall not make strait his brother, each man shall go in his own path; but also they shall fall down by windows, and shall not be hurt.
JOE 2:9 They shall enter into the city, they shall run on the wall; they shall ascend on houses, they shall enter as a night thief by windows.
JOE 2:10 The earth trembled of his face, heavens were moved, the sun and the moon were made dark, and stars withdrew their shining.
JOE 2:11 And the Lord gave his voice before the face of his host, for his hosts be full many; for those be strong, and do the word of him. For the day of the Lord is great, and full fearedful, and who shall suffer it?
JOE 2:12 Now therefore saith the Lord, Be ye turned again to me in all your heart, in fasting, and weeping, and wailing;
JOE 2:13 and carve ye your hearts, and not your clothes, and be ye turned again to your Lord God, for he is benign, and merciful, patient, and of much mercy, and abiding, either forgiving, on malice.
JOE 2:14 Who knoweth, if God be turned again, and forgive, and leave blessing after him? sacrifice and moist sacrifice to our Lord God.
JOE 2:15 Sing ye with a trump in Zion, hallow ye fasting, call ye a company;
JOE 2:16 gather together the people, hallow ye the church, gather ye together eld [[or old]] men, gather ye together little children, and those sucking the breasts; a spouse go out of his bed, and a spousess out of her chamber.
JOE 2:17 Priests, the ministers of the Lord, shall weep betwixt the porch and the altar, and shall say, Lord! spare thou, spare thy people, and give thou not thine heritage into shame, that nations be lords of them. Why say they among peoples, Where is the God of them?
JOE 2:18 The Lord loved jealously his land, and spared his people.
JOE 2:19 And the Lord answered, and said to his people, Lo! I shall send to you wheat, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be [[ful]] filled with those; and I shall no more give you to be a shame among heathen men.
JOE 2:20 And I shall make him that is at the north far from you; and I shall cast him out into a land without way, and desert; his face against the east sea, and the last part thereof at the last sea; and the stink thereof shall ascend or go up, and the root thereof shall ascend [[or go up]], for he did proudly.
JOE 2:21 Earth, do not thou dread, make thou full out joy, and be glad; for the Lord magnified that he should do.
JOE 2:22 Beasts of the country, do not ye dread, for the fair things of desert burgeoned; for the tree brought his fruit, the fig tree and vinery [[or the vineyard]] gave their strength.
JOE 2:23 And the sons of Zion, make ye full out joy, and be ye glad in your Lord God, for he gave to you a teacher of rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], and he shall make morrowtide rain and eventide rain to come down to you, as in the beginning.
JOE 2:24 And cornfloors shall be [[full-]]filled of wheat, and pressers shall flow with wine and oil.
JOE 2:25 And I shall yield to you the years which the locust, bruchus, and rust, and wortworm, my great strength, ate, which I sent into you.
JOE 2:26 And ye shall eat eating, and ye shall be [[ful]] filled; and ye shall praise the name of your Lord God, that made marvels with you; and my people shall not be shamed without end.
JOE 2:27 And ye shall know, that I am in the midst of Israel; and I am your Lord God, and none is more; and my people shall not be shamed without end.
JOE 2:28 And it shall be, after these things I shall shed [[or pour]] out my spirit on each man; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; your eld [[or old]] men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions.
JOE 2:29 But also I shall shed [[or pour]] out my spirit on my servants, and hand-maids, in those days;
JOE 2:30 and I shall give great wonders in heaven, and in earth, blood, and fire, and the heat of smoke.
JOE 2:31 The sun shall be turned into darknesses, and the moon into blood, before that the great day and horrible of the Lord come.
JOE 2:32 And it shall be, each that calleth to help the name of the Lord shall be safe; for why salvation, either saving, shall be in the hill of Zion and in Jerusalem, as the Lord said, and in the residue men, which the Lord calleth.
JOE 3:1 For lo! in those days, and in that time, when I shall turn the captivity of Judah and of Jerusalem,
JOE 3:2 I shall gather all folks, and I shall lead them [[forth]] into the valley of Jehoshaphat; and I shall dispute there with them on my people, and mine heritage Israel, which they scattered among nations; and they parted my land,
JOE 3:3 and sent lot on my people; and they setted [[or putted]] a knave child in the bordel house, and sold a damsel for wine, that they should drink.
JOE 3:4 But what to me and to you, thou Tyre, and Sidon, and each end of Palestine or Philistia? Whether ye shall yield avenging to me? and if ye venge you against me, soon swiftly I shall yield while to you onto your head.
JOE 3:5 Ye took away my silver and gold, and ye brought my desirable things and fairest things into your temples of idols.
JOE 3:6 And ye sold the sons of Judah, and the sons of Jerusalem, to the sons of Greeks, that ye should make them far from their coasts.
JOE 3:7 Lo! I shall raise them from the place in which ye sold them; and I shall turn your yielding into your head.
JOE 3:8 And I shall sell your sons and your daughters into the hands of the sons of Judah, and they shall sell them to Sabeans, a far-off folk, for the Lord spake.
JOE 3:9 Cry ye this thing among heathen men, hallow ye battle, raise ye up strong men; all men warriors, nigheth, and ascend or goeth up.
JOE 3:10 Beat ye together your plows into swords, and your mattocks, either pickaxes, into spears; a feeble man say, that I am strong.
JOE 3:11 All folks, break ye out, and come from compass about, and be ye gathered together; there the Lord shall make thy strong men to die.
JOE 3:12 Folks rise together, and ascend or goeth up into the valley of Jehoshaphat; for I shall sit there, to deem all folks in compass.
JOE 3:13 Send ye sickles, either scythes, for [[the]] ripe corn waxed; come ye, and go ye down, for the presser is full; pressers be plenteous, for the malice of them is multiplied.
JOE 3:14 Peoples, peoples in the valley of cutting down [[or the valley of concision, or slaying together]]; for the day of the Lord is nigh in the valley of cutting down [[or the valley of concision]].
JOE 3:15 The sun and the moon be made dark, and stars withdraw their shining.
JOE 3:16 And the Lord shall roar from Zion, and shall give his voice from Jerusalem, and heavens and earth shall be moved; and the Lord is the hope of his people, and the strength of the sons of Israel.
JOE 3:17 And ye shall know, that I am your Lord God, dwelling in Zion, in mine holy hill; and Jerusalem shall be holy, and aliens shall no more pass by it.
JOE 3:18 And it shall be, in that day, mountains shall drop with sweetness, and little hills shall flow with milk, and waters shall go by all the rivers of Judah; and a well shall go out of the house of the Lord, and shall moist the strand of thorns.
JOE 3:19 Egypt shall be into desolation, and Idumea into desert of perdition; for that that they did wickedly against the sons of Judah, and shedded out innocent blood in their land.
JOE 3:20 And Judah shall be inhabited without end, and Jerusalem into generation and into generation.
JOE 3:21 And I shall cleanse the blood of them, which I had not cleansed; and the Lord shall dwell in Zion.
OBA 1:1 [[The]] Vision of Obadiah. The Lord God saith these things to Edom. We heard an hearing of the Lord, and he sent a legate, either a messenger, to heathen men. Rise ye, and together rise we against him into battle.
OBA 1:2 Lo! I gave thee little in heathen men, thou art full much worthy to be despised.
OBA 1:3 The pride of thine heart enhanced thee, dwelling in the crazings of stones, araising thy seat. Which sayest in thine heart, Who shall draw me down into earth?
OBA 1:4 Though thou shalt be raised as an eagle, and thou shalt put thy nest among stars, from thence I shall draw thee down, saith the Lord.
OBA 1:5 If night thieves had entered to thee, if outlaws by night, how shouldest thou have been still? whether they should not have stolen things enough to them? If gatherers of grapes had entered to thee, whether they should have left namely raisins, or clusters, to thee?
OBA 1:6 How sought they Esau, searched the hid things of him?
OBA 1:7 Till to the terms they sent out thee; and all men of thy covenant of peace scorned, either deceived, thee, men of thy peace waxed strong against thee; they that shall eat with thee, shall set ambush, either treasons, under thee; there is no prudence in him.
OBA 1:8 Whether not in that day, saith the Lord, I shall lose the wise men of Idumea, and prudence of the mount of Esau?
OBA 1:9 And thy strong men shall dread of midday, either south, that a man of the hill of Esau perish.
OBA 1:10 For slaying and for wickedness against thy brother Jacob, confusion shall cover thee, and thou shalt perish without end.
OBA 1:11 In the day when thou stoodest against him, when aliens took the host of him, and strangers entered into the gates of him, and sent lot on Jerusalem, thou were also as one of them.
OBA 1:12 And thou shalt not despise in the day of thy brother, in the day of his pilgrimage, and thou shalt not be glad on the sons of Judah, in the day of perdition of them; and thou shalt not magnify thy mouth in the day of anguish,
OBA 1:13 neither thou shalt enter into the gate of my people, in the day of falling of them; and thou shalt not despise in the evils of him, in the day of his destroying; and thou shalt not be sent out against his host, in the day of his destroying;
OBA 1:14 neither thou shalt stand in the going out [[of the ways]], that thou slay them that fled; and thou shalt not enclose together the residues, either left men, of him, in the day of tribulation,
OBA 1:15 for the day of the Lord is nigh on all heathen men. As thou hast done, it shall be done to thee; he shall convert thy yielding into thine head.
OBA 1:16 For as ye drank on mine holy hill, all heathen men shall drink busily, and they shall drink, and they shall swallow up; and they shall be as if they be not.
OBA 1:17 And salvation shall be in the hill of Zion, and it shall be holy; and the house of Jacob shall wield them which wielded them.
OBA 1:18 And the house of Jacob shall be fire, and the house of Joseph shall be flame, and the house of Esau shall be stubble; and they shall be kindled in them, and they shall devour them; and remnants shall not be of the house of Esau, for the Lord spake,.
OBA 1:19 And these that be at the south, shall inherit the hill of Esau; and they that be in the low fields, shall inherit Philistines; and they shall wield the country of Ephraim, and the country of Samaria; and Benjamin shall wield Gilead.
OBA 1:20 And transmigration, either passing over, of this host of sons of Israel shall wield all places of Canaanites, till to Zarephath; and the transmigration of Jerusalem, which is in Sepharad, shall wield the cities of the south.
OBA 1:21 And saviours shall ascend or go up into the hill of Zion, for to deem the hill of Esau, and a realm shall be to the Lord.
JON 1:1 And the word of the Lord was made to Jonah, the son of Amittai, and said,
JON 1:2 Rise thou, and go into Nineveh, the great city, and preach thou therein, for the malice thereof goeth up before me.
JON 1:3 And Jonah rose for to flee into Tarshish, from the face of the Lord. And he came down to Joppa, and found a ship going into Tarshish, and he gave ship-hire to them; and he went down into it, for to go with them into Tarshish, from the face of the Lord.
JON 1:4 Forsooth the Lord sent a great wind into the sea, and a great tempest was made in the sea, and the ship was in peril for to be all-broken.
JON 1:5 And shipmen dreaded, and men cried to their god; and sent vessels, that were in the ship, into the sea, that it were made lighter of them. And Jonah went down into the inner things of the ship, and slept by a grievous sleep.
JON 1:6 And the governor came to him, and said to him, Why art thou cast down in sleep? rise thou, call thy God to help, if peradventure God again-think of us, and we perish not.
JON 1:7 And a man said to his fellows, Come ye, and cast we lots, and know we, why this evil is to us. And they cast lots, and lot fell on Jonah.
JON 1:8 And they said to him, Show thou to us, for cause of what thing this evil is to us; what is thy work, which is thy land, and whither goest thou, either of what people art thou?
JON 1:9 And he said to them, I am an Hebrew, and I dread the Lord God of heaven, that made the sea and the dry land.
JON 1:10 And the men dreaded with great dread, and said to him, Why didest thou this thing? for the men knew that he flew from the face of the Lord, for Jonah had showed to them.
JON 1:11 And they said to him, What shall we do to thee, and the sea shall cease from us? for the sea went, and waxed great on them.
JON 1:12 And he said to them, Take ye me, and throw or send me into the sea, and the sea shall cease from you; for I know, that for me this great tempest is on you.
JON 1:13 And the men rowed, for to turn again to the dry land, and they might not, for the sea went, and waxed great on them.
JON 1:14 And they cried to the Lord, and said, Lord, we beseech, that we perish not in the life of this man, and that thou give not on us innocent blood; for thou, Lord, didest as thou wouldest.
JON 1:15 And they took Jonah, and threw or sent into the sea; and the sea stood of his boiling.
JON 1:16 And the men dreaded the Lord with great dread, and offered hosts to the Lord, and vowed avows.
JON 1:17 And the Lord made ready a great fish, that he should swallow Jonah; and Jonah was in the womb of the fish three days and three nights.
JON 2:1 And Jonah prayed to the Lord his God from the fish’s womb,
JON 2:2 and said, I cried to God of my tribulation, and he heard me; from the womb of hell I cried, and thou heardest my voice.
JON 2:3 Thou castedest me down into deepness, in the heart of the sea, and the floods compassed me [[about]]; all thy swells and thy waves passed on me.
JON 2:4 And I said, I am cast away from the sight of thine eyes; nevertheless again I shall see thine holy temple.
JON 2:5 Waters encompassed me till to my soul, deepness environed me, the seaweed covered mine head.
JON 2:6 I went down to the uttermost places of hills, the bars of earth enclosed me altogether, into without end; and thou, my Lord God, shalt raise up my life from corruption.
JON 2:7 When my soul was anguished in me, I bethought on the Lord, that my prayer come to thee, to thine holy temple.
JON 2:8 They that keep vanities, forsake their mercy idly.
JON 2:9 But I in voice of praising shall offer to thee; whatever things I vowed, I shall yield to the Lord, for mine health.
JON 2:10 And the Lord said to the fish, and it casted out Jonah on/to the dry land.
JON 3:1 And the word of the Lord was made the second time to Jonah, and said,
JON 3:2 Rise thou, and go into Nineveh, the great city, and preach thou in it the preaching which I speak to thee.
JON 3:3 And Jonah rose, and went into Nineveh, by the word of the Lord. And Nineveh was a great city, of the journey of three days.
JON 3:4 And Jonah began for to enter into the city, by the journey of one day, and cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overturned, or destroyed.
JON 3:5 And men of Nineveh believed to the Lord, and preached fasting, and were clothed with sackcloths, from the more till to the less.
JON 3:6 And the word came to the king of Nineveh; and he rose off his seat, and casted away his clothing from him, and was clothed with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.
JON 3:7 And he cried, and said in Nineveh of the mouth of the king and of his princes, saying, Men, and work beasts, and oxen, and sheep, taste not anything, neither be fed, neither drink water.
JON 3:8 And men be covered with sack-cloths, and work beasts, all cry to the Lord in strength; and be a man converted, or all-turned, from his evil way, and from wickedness that is in the hands of them.
JON 3:9 Who knoweth, if God be converted, and forgive, and be turned away from strong vengeance of his wrath, and we shall not perish?
JON 3:10 And God saw the works of them, that they were converted from their evil way; and God had mercy on the malice which he spake, that he would do to them, and did not.
JON 4:1 And Jonah was tormented with great torment, and was wroth.
JON 4:2 And he prayed to the Lord, and said, Lord, I beseech, whether this is not my word, when I was yet in my land? For this thing I purposed for to flee into Tarshish; for I know, that thou, God, art meek and merciful, patient, and of much merciful doing, and forgiving of malice.
JON 4:3 And now, Lord, I pray, take my life from me; for death is better to me than life.
JON 4:4 And the Lord said, Guessest thou, whether thou art well wroth?
JON 4:5 And Jonah went out of the city, and sat against the east of the city, and made to him a shadowing place there; and sat under it in shadow, till he saw what befell to the city.
JON 4:6 And the Lord God made ready an ivy, and it went upon the head of Jonah, that shadow or shade were on his head, and covered him; for he had travailed. And Jonah was glad on the ivy, with great gladness.
JON 4:7 And God made ready a worm, in the going up of gray day on the morrow; and it smote the ivy, and it dried up.
JON 4:8 And when the sun was risen, the Lord commanded to the hot wind and burning; and the sun smote on the head of Jonah, and he sweltered. And he asked to his soul that he should die, and said, It is better to me to die, than to live.
JON 4:9 And the Lord said to Jonah, Guessest thou, whether thou art well wroth on the ivy? And he said, I am well wroth, till to the death.
JON 4:10 And the Lord said, Thou art sorry on the ivy, in which thou travailedest not, neither madest that it waxed, which was grown under one night, and perished in one night.
JON 4:11 And shall I not spare the great city Nineveh, in which be more than sixscore thousand of men, which know not what is betwixt their right half and left half, and many beasts?
MIC 1:1 The word of the Lord, which was made to Micah the Morasthite, in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah; which word he saw on Samaria and Jerusalem.
MIC 1:2 Hear ye, all peoples, and the earth perceive, and the plenty thereof, and be the Lord God to you into a witness, the Lord from his holy temple.
MIC 1:3 For lo! the Lord shall go out of his place, and shall come down, and shall tread on high things of earth.
MIC 1:4 And mountains shall be wasted under him, and valleys shall be cut, as wax from the face of fire, and as waters that run down into a pit.
MIC 1:5 In the great trespass of Jacob is all this thing, and in the sins of the house of Israel. Which is the great trespass of Jacob? whether not Samaria? and which be the high things of Judah? whether not Jerusalem?
MIC 1:6 And I shall put Samaria as an heap of stones in the field, when a vine-yard is planted; and I shall draw away the stones thereof into a valley, and I shall show the foundaments thereof.
MIC 1:7 And all graven images thereof shall be beaten together, and all hires thereof shall be burnt in fire; and I shall put all the idols thereof into perdition; for of the hires of an whore those be gathered, and to hire of an whore those shall turn again.
MIC 1:8 On this thing I shall wail and yell, I shall go spoiled and naked; I shall make wailing as of dragons, and mourning as of ostriches.
MIC 1:9 For wound thereof is despaired; for it came till to Judah, it touched the gate of my people, till to Jerusalem.
MIC 1:10 In Gath do not ye tell, by tears weep ye not; in the house of dust with dust altogether sprinkle you.
MIC 1:11 And ye of a fair dwelling, pass to you, which is confounded with evil fame; it is not gone out, which dwelleth in the going out; a nigh house shall take of you wailing, which stood to itself.
MIC 1:12 For it is made sick [[in]] to good, which dwelleth in bitternesses. For evil came down from the Lord into the gate of Jerusalem,
MIC 1:13 the noise of [[a]] four-horsed cart, of dread to the people dwelling at Lachish. It is the beginning of sin of the daughter of Zion, for the great trespasses of Israel be found in thee.
MIC 1:14 Therefore he shall give warriors on the heritage of Gath, on the houses of leasing into deceit to kings of Israel.
MIC 1:15 Yet I shall bring an heir to thee, that dwellest in Mareshah; the glory of Israel shall come till to the cave at Adullam.
MIC 1:16 Be thou made bald, and be thou clipped on the sons of thy delights; alarge thy baldness as an eagle, for they be led captive from thee.
MIC 2:1 Woe to you, that think unprofitable thing, and work evil in your beds; in the morrowtide light they do it, for the hand of them is against God.
MIC 2:2 They coveted fields, and took violently; and ravished houses, and falsely challenged a man and his house, a man and his heritage.
MIC 2:3 Therefore the Lord saith these things, Lo! I think on this meine evil, from which ye shall not take away your necks; and ye shall not walk proud, for the worst time is.
MIC 2:4 In that day a parable shall be taken on you, and a song shall be sung with sweetness of men, saying, By robbing we be destroyed; a part of my people is changed; how shall he go away from me, when he turneth again that shall part your countries?
MIC 2:5 For this thing, none shall be to thee sending a little cord of lot, in company of the Lord.
MIC 2:6 A! thou Israel, speak ye not speaking; it shall not drop a word on these men, confusion shall not catch,
MIC 2:7 saith the house of Jacob. Whether the Spirit of the Lord is abridged, either such be the thoughts of him? Whether my words be not good, with him that goeth rightly?
MIC 2:8 And on the contrary, my people rose together into an adversary; ye took away the mantle above the coat, and ye turned into battle them that went simply.
MIC 2:9 Ye casted the women of my people out of the house of their delights; from the little children of them ye took away my praising without end.
MIC 2:10 Rise ye, and go, for here ye have no rest; for the uncleanness thereof it shall be corrupted with the worst rot.
MIC 2:11 I would that I were not a man having spirit, and rather that I spake a leasing. I shall drop a word to thee into wine, and into drunkenness; and this people shall be, on whom it is dropped.
MIC 2:12 With gathering I shall gather Jacob; I shall lead together thee all into one, the remnants of Israel. I shall put him together, as a flock in the fold; as sheep in the middle of folds they shall make noise, because of multitude of men.
MIC 2:13 For he shall go up showing the way before them; they shall depart, and pass the gate, and shall go out thereby; and the king of them shall pass before them, and the Lord in the head of them.
MIC 3:1 And I said, Ye princes of Jacob, and dukes of the house of Israel, hear. Whether it is not yours for to know doom,
MIC 3:2 which hate good, and love evil? Which violently take away the skins of them from above them, and the flesh of them from above the bones of them.
MIC 3:3 Which ate the flesh of my people, and uncovered, [[or flayed off]], the skin of them from above; and brake altogether the bones of them, and cutted them up altogether as in a cauldron, and as flesh in the middle of a pot.
MIC 3:4 Then they shall cry to the Lord, and he shall not hear them; and he shall hide his face from them in that time, as they did wickedly in their findings.
MIC 3:5 The Lord saith these things on the prophets that deceive my people, that bite with their teeth, and preach peace; and if any man giveth not in the mouth of them anything, they hallow battle on him.
MIC 3:6 Therefore night shall be to you for vision, or prophecy, and darknesses to you for divination; and the sun shall go down on the prophets, and the day shall be made dark on them.
MIC 3:7 And they shall be confounded that see visions, and diviners shall be confounded, and all shall cover their cheers, for it is not the answer of God.
MIC 3:8 Nevertheless I am filled with strength of the Spirit of the Lord, and with doom and power, that I show to Jacob his great trespass, and to Israel his sin.
MIC 3:9 Hear these things, ye princes of the house of Jacob, and doomsmen of the house of Israel, which loathe doom, and pervert all right things;
MIC 3:10 which build Zion in bloods, and Jerusalem in wickedness.
MIC 3:11 The princes thereof deemed for gifts, and [[the]] priests thereof taught for hire, and the prophets thereof divined for money; and on the Lord they rested, and said, Whether the Lord is not in the middle of us? evils shall not come on us.
MIC 3:12 For this thing because of you, Zion as a field shall be eared; and Jerusalem shall be as an heap of stones, and the hill of the temple shall be into high things of woods.
MIC 4:1 And in the last days, the hill of the house of the Lord shall be made ready in the top of [[the]] hills, and shall be high over small hills. And peoples shall flow to him,
MIC 4:2 and many peoples shall hasten, and shall say, Come ye, ascend or go we up to the hill of the Lord, and to the house of God of Jacob; and he shall teach us of his ways, and we shall go in his paths. For the law shall go out from Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem;
MIC 4:3 and he shall deem betwixt many peoples, and shall chastise strong folks till into far. And they shall beat together their swords into shares, and their spears into pickaxes; folk shall not take sword against folk, and they shall no more learn to fight.
MIC 4:4 And a man shall sit under his vineyard, and under his fig tree; and there shall not be that shall make afeared, for the mouth of the Lord of hosts spake.
MIC 4:5 For all peoples shall go, each man in the name of his Lord God; but we shall walk in the name of our Lord God into the world, and over.
MIC 4:6 In that day, saith the Lord, I shall gather the halting, and I shall gather her that I casted away, and whom I tormented I shall comfort.
MIC 4:7 And I shall put the halting into remnants, and her that travailed in[[to]] a strong folk. And the Lord shall reign on them in the hill of Zion, from this time now and till into without end.
MIC 4:8 And thou, dark tower of the flock of the daughter of Zion, unto thee he shall come, and the first power shall come, the realm of the daughter of Jerusalem.
MIC 4:9 Now why art thou drawn together with mourning? whether a king is not to thee, either thy counsellor perished? for sorrow hath taken thee as a woman travailing of child.
MIC 4:10 Thou daughter of Zion, make sorrow, and haste, as a woman travailing of child; for now thou shalt go out of the city, and shalt dwell in the country, and shalt come unto Babylon; there thou shalt be delivered, there the Lord shall again-buy thee, from the hand of thine enemies.
MIC 4:11 And now many folks be gathered on thee, which say, Be it stoned, and our eye behold into Zion.
MIC 4:12 Forsooth they knew not the thoughts of the Lord, and understood not the counsel of him, for he gathered them as the hay of the field.
MIC 4:13 Rise thou, and thresh, daughter of Zion, for I shall put thine horn of iron, and I shall put thy nails brazen; and thou shalt lose, either waste, many peoples, and shalt slay to the Lord for an offering the ravens of them, and the strength of them to the Lord of all earth.
MIC 5:1 Now thou, daughter of a thief, shalt be destroyed; they putted on us besieging, in a rod they shall smite the cheek of the judge of Israel.
MIC 5:2 And thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, art little in the thousands of Judah; he that is the lordly governor in Israel shall go out of thee to me; and the going out of him is from [[the]] beginning, from days of everlastingness.
MIC 5:3 For this thing he shall give them up, till to the time in which the woman travailing of child shall bear child, and the remnants of his brethren shall be turned again to the sons of Israel.
MIC 5:4 And he shall stand, and shall feed in the strength of the Lord, in the height of the name of his Lord God; and they shall be converted, for now he shall be magnified till to the ends of all earth.
MIC 5:5 And this shall be peace, when Assyrian shall come into our land, and when he shall tread in our houses; and we shall raise on him seven shepherds, and eight primates men, either the first in dignity.
MIC 5:6 And they shall waste the land of Assur by sword, and the land of Nimrod by spears of him; and he shall deliver us from Assur, when he shall come into our land, and when he shall tread in our coasts.
MIC 5:7 And remnants of Jacob shall be in the midst of many peoples, as dew of the Lord, and as drops on herb, which abideth not man, and shall not abide the sons of men.
MIC 5:8 And remnants of Jacob shall be in heathen men, in the middle of many peoples, as a lion among beasts of the woods, and as a whelp of a lion roaring in flocks of sheep; and when he passeth, and defouleth, and taketh, there is not that shall deliver.
MIC 5:9 And thine hand shall be raised on thine enemies, and all thine enemies shall perish.
MIC 5:10 And it shall be, in that day, saith the Lord, I shall take away thine horses from the middle of thee, and I shall destroy thy four-horsed carts.
MIC 5:11 And I shall lose the cities of thy land, and I shall destroy all thy strongholds, either wardings;
MIC 5:12 and I shall do away witchcrafts from thine hand, and divinations, either tellings by devil’s craft, shall not be in thee.
MIC 5:13 And I shall make for to perish thy graven images, and I shall break altogether from the middle of thee thine images, and thou shalt no more worship the works of thine hands.
MIC 5:14 And I shall draw out of the midst of thee thy woods dedicated to idols, and I shall all-break thy cities.
MIC 5:15 And I shall make in wrath and indignation vengeance in all folks, which heard not.
MIC 6:1 Hear ye which things the Lord speaketh. Rise thou, strive thou by doom against mountains, and little hills hear thy voice.
MIC 6:2 Mountains and the strong foundaments of earth, hear the doom of the Lord; for the doom of the Lord shall be with his people, and he shall be deemed with Israel.
MIC 6:3 My people, what have I done to thee, either in what was I grievous to thee? Answer thou to me.
MIC 6:4 For I led thee out of the land of Egypt, and of the house of servage I delivered thee; and I sent before thy face Moses, and Aaron, and Mary.
MIC 6:5 My people, bethink, I pray, what Balak, king of Moab, thought, and what Balaam, son of Beor, of Shittim, answered to him till to Gilgal, that thou shouldest know the rightwiseness of the Lord.
MIC 6:6 What worthy thing shall I offer to the Lord? shall I bow the knee to the high God? Whether shall I offer to him brunt sacrifices, and calves of one year?
MIC 6:7 Whether God may be satisfied in thousands of wethers, either in many thousands of fat goat bucks? Whether I shall give my first begotten for my great trespass, the fruit of my womb for sin of my soul?
MIC 6:8 I shall show to thee, thou man, what is good, and what the Lord asketh of thee; forsooth for to do doom, and for to love mercy, and be busy for to walk with thy God.
MIC 6:9 The voice of the Lord crieth to the city, and health shall be to all men dreading thy name. Ye lineages, hear; and who shall approve it?
MIC 6:10 Yet fire is in the house of unpious men, the treasures of wickedness, and a less measure, which make me full of wrath.
MIC 6:11 Whether I shall justify the wicked balance, and the guileful weights of a little sack,
MIC 6:12 in which rich men thereof be filled with wickedness? And men dwelling therein spake leasing, and the tongue of them was guileful in the mouth of them.
MIC 6:13 And I therefore began for to smite thee, into perdition on thy sins.
MIC 6:14 Thou shalt eat, and shalt not be [[ful]] filled, and thy meeking is in the middle of thee; and thou shalt take, and shalt not save; and which thou shalt save, I shall give into sword.
MIC 6:15 Thou shalt sow, and shalt not reap; thou shalt tread the olive, and shalt not be anointed with oil; and make must, and shalt not drink wine.
MIC 6:16 And thou keptest the behests of Omri, and all the work of the house of Ahab, and hast walked in the lusts of them, that I should give thee into perdition, and men dwelling in it into hissing, either scorning, and ye shall bear the shame of my people.
MIC 7:1 Woe to me, for I am made as he that gathereth in harvest raisins of grapes; there is no cluster for to eat; my soul desired figs ripe before others.
MIC 7:2 The holy perished from [[the]] earth, and rightful is not in men; all ambush, either set treason, in blood; a man hunteth his brother to death.
MIC 7:3 The evil of their hands they say good; the prince asketh, and the doomsman is in yielding; and a great man spake the desire of his soul, and they troubled altogether it.
MIC 7:4 He that is the best in them, is as a paliurus, that is, a teasel, either a sharp bush; and he that is rightful is as a thorn of hedge. The day of thy beholding, thy visiting cometh, now shall be destroying of them.
MIC 7:5 Do not ye believe to a friend, and do not ye trust in a duke; from her that sleepeth in thy bosom, keep thou the closings of thy mouth.
MIC 7:6 For the son doeth wrong to the father, and the daughter shall rise against her mother, and the wife of the son against the mother of her husband; the enemies of a man be the ones at home, either the house-hold meine, of him.
MIC 7:7 Forsooth I shall behold to the Lord, I shall abide God my saviour; the Lord my God shall hear me.
MIC 7:8 Thou, mine enemy, be not glad on me, for I fell down, I shall rise up again; when I sit in darknesses, the Lord is my light.
MIC 7:9 I shall bear wrath of the Lord, for I have sinned to him, till he deem my cause, and make my doom; he shall lead out me into light, I shall see [[the]] rightwiseness of him.
MIC 7:10 And mine enemy shall behold me, and she shall be covered with confusion, which saith to me, Where is thy Lord God? Mine eyes shall see her, now she shall be into defouling, as clay, either fen, of streets.
MIC 7:11 Day shall come, that thy walls be builded; in that day law shall be made afar.
MIC 7:12 In that day, and Assur shall come till to thee, and till to strong cities, and from strong cities till to [[the]] flood; and to sea from sea, and to hill from hill.
MIC 7:13 And [[the]] earth shall be into desolation for her dwellers, and for fruit of the thoughts of them.
MIC 7:14 Feed thou thy people in thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, that dwell alone in [[the]] wild wood; in the middle of Carmel they shall be fed of Bashan and of Gilead, as by eld [[or old]] days,
MIC 7:15 by days of thy going out of the land of Egypt. I shall show to him wonderful things;
MIC 7:16 heathen men shall see, and they shall be confounded on all their strength; they shall put hands on their mouth, the ears of them shall be deaf;
MIC 7:17 they shall lick dust as a serpent; as creeping things of [[the]] earth they shall be disturbed, or troubled, out of their houses; they shall not desire our Lord God, and they shall dread thee.
MIC 7:18 God, who is like thee, that doest away wickedness, and bearest over the sin of the remnants of thine heritage? He shall no more send in his strong vengeance, for he is willing or desiring mercy;
MIC 7:19 he shall turn again, and have mercy on us. He shall put down our wickednesses, and shall cast far into deepness of the sea all our sins.
MIC 7:20 Thou shalt give truth to Jacob, mercy to Abraham, which thou sworest to our fathers from eld [[or old]] days.
HAB 1:1 The burden that Habakkuk, the prophet, saw.
HAB 1:2 How long, Lord, shall I cry, and thou shalt not hear? I suffering violence shall cry on high to thee, and thou shalt not save?
HAB 1:3 Why showedest thou to me wickedness and travail, for to see prey and unrightwiseness against me? Why beholdest thou despisers, and art still, the while the unpious man defouleth a right-fuller than himself? And thou shalt make men as fishes of the sea, and as creeping things not having a leader; and doom is made, and against-saying is more mighty.
HAB 1:4 For this thing law is broken, and doom cometh not till to the end; for the unpious man hath might against the just, therefore wayward doom shall go out.
HAB 1:5 Behold ye in heathen men, and see ye, and wonder ye, and greatly dread ye; for a work is done in your days, which no man shall believe, when it shall be told.
HAB 1:6 For lo! I shall raise Chaldees, a bitter folk and swift, going on the breadth of earth, that he wield tabernacles not his.
HAB 1:7 It is horrible, and dreadful; the doom and the burden thereof shall go out of itself.
HAB 1:8 His horses be lighter than leopards, and swifter than eventide wolves, and his horsemen shall be scattered abroad; for why his horsemen shall come from far, they shall fly as an eagle hasting to eat.
HAB 1:9 All these men shall come to or for prey, the faces of them is as a burning wind; and he shall gather as gravel the captivity,
HAB 1:10 and he shall have victory of kings, and tyrants shall be of his scorning. He shall laugh on all strength or stronghold, and shall bear together [[an]] heap of earth, and shall take it.
HAB 1:11 Then the spirit [[of him]] shall be changed, and he shall pass forth, and fall down; this is the strength of him, of his god.
HAB 1:12 Whether thou art not from the beginning, thou, Lord my God, mine Holy, and we shall not die? Lord, into doom thou hast set him, and thou groundedest him strong, that thou shouldest chastise.
HAB 1:13 Thine eyes be clean, see thou not evil, and thou shalt not be able to behold to wickedness. Why beholdest thou not on men doing wickedly, and thou art still, while the unpious man devoureth a more just man than himself?
HAB 1:14 And thou shalt make men as fishes of the sea, and as a creeping thing not having a prince.
HAB 1:15 He shall lift up all in the hook; he drew it in his great net, and gathered into his net; on this thing he shall be glad, and make joy withoutforth.
HAB 1:16 Therefore he shall offer to his great net, and shall make sacrifice to his net; for in them his part is made fat, and his meat is chosen.
HAB 1:17 Therefore for this thing he spread-eth abroad his great net, and ever-more he ceaseth not for to slay folks.
HAB 2:1 On my keeping I shall stand, and shall pitch my step on [[the]] warding; and I shall behold, that I see what thing shall be said to me, and what I shall answer to him that reproveth me.
HAB 2:2 And the Lord answered to me, and said, Write thou the sight, either revelation, and make it plain on tables, that he run, that shall read it.
HAB 2:3 For yet the vision is far, and it shall appear into the end, and shall not lie; if it shall make dwelling, abide thou it, for it coming shall come, and shall not tarry.
HAB 2:4 Lo! the soul of him, that is unbelieveful, shall not be rightful [[or right]] in himself; forsooth the just man shall live in his faith.
HAB 2:5 And as wine deceiveth a man drinking, so shall the proud man be, and he shall not be made fair; for as hell he alarged his soul, and he is as death, and he is not [[ful]] filled; and he shall gather to him all folks, and he shall gather together to him all peoples.
HAB 2:6 Whether not all these peoples shall take a parable on him, and the speaking of dark sentences of him? And it shall be said, Woe to him that multiplieth things not his own; how long, and he aggregateth against himself thick clay?
HAB 2:7 Whether not suddenly they shall rise together, that shall bite thee? And they shall be raised tearing thee, and thou shalt be into raven to them; and thine ambushers in evil shall wake.
HAB 2:8 For thou robbedest many folks, all shall rob thee, which shall be residue, either left, of peoples, for blood of man, and for wickedness of land, of the city, and of all men dwelling in it.
HAB 2:9 Woe to him that gathereth evil covetousness to his house, that his nest be on high, and guesseth him for to be delivered of the hand of evil.
HAB 2:10 Thou thoughtest confusion to thine house; thou hast slain many peoples, and thy soul sinned.
HAB 2:11 For the stone of the wall shall cry, and a tree that is betwixt jointures of buildings shall answer.
HAB 2:12 Woe to him that buildeth a city in bloods, and maketh ready a city in wickedness.
HAB 2:13 Whether not these things be of the Lord of hosts? For peoples shall travail in much fire, and folks in vain, and they shall fail.
HAB 2:14 For the earth shall be filled, that it know the glory of the Lord, as waters covering the sea.
HAB 2:15 Woe to him that giveth drink to his friend, and sendeth his gall, and maketh drunken, that he behold his nakedness.
HAB 2:16 He is filled with evil fame for glory; and thou drink, and be fast asleep; the cup of the right half of the Lord shall compass thee, and casting up, either spewing, of evil fame [[up]] on thy glory.
HAB 2:17 For the wickedness of Lebanon shall cover thee, and [[the]] destruction of beasts shall make them afeared, of bloods of man, and of wickedness of [[the]] land, and of the city, and of all men dwelling therein.
HAB 2:18 What profiteth the graven image, for his maker engraved it, a welled thing together, and [[a]] false image? for the maker thereof hoped in [[the]] making, that he made dumb simulacra.
HAB 2:19 Woe to him that saith to a tree, Wake thou; Rise thou, to a stone being still; whether he shall be able to teach? Lo! this thing is covered with gold and silver, and no spirit is in his entrails.
HAB 2:20 Forsooth the Lord is in his holy temple, all earth be still from his face.
HAB 3:1 The prayer of Habakkuk, the prophet, for unknowing men.
HAB 3:2 Lord, I heard thy praising, and I dreaded; Lord, it is thy work, in the middle of years, quicken thou it. In the middle of years, thou shalt make thyself known; when thou shalt be wroth, thou shalt have mind of mercy.
HAB 3:3 God shall come from the south, and the Holy from the mount of Paran. The glory of him covered heavens, and the earth is full of his praising.
HAB 3:4 The shining of him shall be as light; with horns in the hands of him. There the strength of him was hid,
HAB 3:5 death shall go before his face; the devil shall go out before his feet.
HAB 3:6 He stood, and meted the earth; he beheld, and unbound folks, and hills of the world were all-broken; the little hills of the world were bowed down, of the ways of his everlastingness.
HAB 3:7 For wickedness I saw the tents of Ethiopia, the skins of the land of Midian shall be troubled.
HAB 3:8 Lord, whether in floods thou art wroth, either in floods is thy strong vengeance, either in the sea is thine indignation? Which shalt ascend [[or go] [up]] on thine horses; and on thy four-horsed carts is salvation.
HAB 3:9 Thou raising shalt raise thy bow, oaths to lineages which thou hast spoken; thou shalt part the floods of earth.
HAB 3:10 Waters saw thee, and hills sorrowed, the gutter of waters passed; deepness gave his voice, highness raised his hands.
HAB 3:11 The sun and moon stood in their dwelling place; in the light of thine arrows they shall go, in the shining of thy spear glistening.
HAB 3:12 In gnashing thou shalt defoul earth, and in strong vengeance thou shalt astonish folks.
HAB 3:13 Thou art gone out into health of thy people, into health with thy christ or thine anointed; thou hast smitten the head of the house of the unpious man, thou hast made naked the foundament till to the neck.
HAB 3:14 Thou cursedest the sceptre, either power, of him, the head of his fighters, to men coming as whirlwind for to scatter me; thou heardest the joying withoutforth of them, as of him that devoureth a poor man in huddles.
HAB 3:15 Thou madest a way in the sea to thine horses, in clay of many waters.
HAB 3:16 I heard, and my womb is troubled altogether; my lips trembled altogether of the voice. Rot entered in[[to]] my bones, and sprang under me; that I rest again in the day of tribulation, and I shall go up to our people girded altogether.
HAB 3:17 For the fig tree shall not flower, and burgeoning shall not be in vineyards; the work of [[the]] olive tree shall lie down, and fields shall not bring forth meat; a sheep shall be cut away from the fold, a drove shall not be in cratches.
HAB 3:18 Forsooth I shall have joy in the Lord, and I shall make joy without-forth in God my Jesus or my salvation.
HAB 3:19 God the Lord is my strength, and he shall put my feet as of harts; and [[up]] on mine high things, the over-comer shall lead forth me, singing in psalms.
BAR 1:1 And these be the words of the book, which Baruch, the son of Neriah, son of Mahseiah, son of Zedekiah, son of Hasadiah, son of Hilkiah, wrote in Babylon;
BAR 1:2 in the fifth year, in the seventh day of the month, in the time wherein Chaldeans took Jerusalem, and burnt it with fire.
BAR 1:3 And Baruch read the words of this book to the ears of Jeconiah, son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and to the ears of all the people coming to the book;
BAR 1:4 and to the ears of the mighty [[men]], sons of kings, and to the ears of priests, and to the ears of the people, from the most unto the least of them [[or from the least unto the most of them]], of all dwelling in Babylon, and at the flood Sud.
BAR 1:5 Which heard, and wept, and fasted, and prayed in the sight of the Lord.
BAR 1:6 And they gathered money, by [[or after]] that that each man’s hand might;
BAR 1:7 and [[they]] sent into Jerusalem to Jehoiakim, the priest, the son of Hilkiah, son of Shallum, and to the priests, and to all the people that were found with him in Jerusalem;
BAR 1:8 when he took the vessels of the temple of the Lord, that were taken away from the temple, to again-call into the land of Judah, in the tenth day of the month Sivan, or May; the silvern [[or silver]] vessels, which Zedekiah, the king of Judah, the son of Josiah, made,
BAR 1:9 after that Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, had taken Jeconiah, and princes, and all mighty men, and the people of the land from Jerusalem, and led them bound into Babylon.
BAR 1:10 And they said, Lo! we have sent to you riches [[or monies]], of which buy ye burnt sacrifices, and incense, and make ye sacrifice, and offer ye for sin at the altar of your Lord God [[or the Lord our God]].
BAR 1:11 And pray ye for the life of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and for the life of Belshazzar, his son, that the days of them be on earth as the days of heaven;
BAR 1:12 that the Lord give virtue to us, and lighten our eyes, that we live under the shadow of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and under the shadow of Belshazzar, his son; and that we serve them by many days, and find grace in the sight of them.
BAR 1:13 And pray ye for us to our Lord God [[or to the Lord our God]], for we have sinned to our Lord God [[or to the Lord our God]], and his strong vengeance is not turned away from us, till into this day.
BAR 1:14 And read ye this book, which we [[have]] sent to you, to be rehearsed in the temple of the Lord, in a solemn day, and in a covenable day.
BAR 1:15 And ye shall say, Rightfulness is to our Lord God [[or To the Lord our God rightwiseness]], but shame of our face is to us, as this day is, to all Judah, and to dwellers in Jerusalem,
BAR 1:16 to our kings, and to our princes, to our priests, and to our prophets, and to our fathers.
BAR 1:17 We sinned before our Lord God [[or before the Lord our God]],
BAR 1:18 and believed not, and trusted not in him. And we were not ready to be subject to him, and we obeyed not to the voice of our Lord God [[or the Lord our God]], that we went in his commandments, which he gave to us;
BAR 1:19 from the day in which he led our fathers out of the land of Egypt, till into this day, we were unbelieveful to our Lord God [[or to the Lord our God]]; and we were scattered, and went away, that we heard not the voice of him.
BAR 1:20 And many evils and cursings, which the Lord ordained to his servant Moses, cleaved to us; which Lord led our fathers out of the land of Egypt, to give to us a land flowing milk and honey, as in this day.
BAR 1:21 And we heard not the voice of our Lord God [[or of the Lord our God]], by [[or after]] all the words of prophets, which he sent to us, and to our judges;
BAR 1:22 and we went away, each man into the wit of his evil heart, to work to alien gods, and we did evils before the eyes of our Lord God [[or before the eyes of the Lord our God]].
BAR 2:1 For which thing our Lord God [[or the Lord our God]] setted steadfastly his word, which he spake to us, and to our judges, that deemed in Israel, and to our kings, and to our princes, and to all Israel and Judah;
BAR 2:2 that the Lord should bring on us great evils, that were not done under heaven, as those be done in Jerusalem; by [[or after]] those things that be written in the law of Moses,
BAR 2:3 that a man should eat the fleshes [[or the flesh]] of his son, and the fleshes [[or the flesh]] of his daughter.
BAR 2:4 And he gave them into the hand of all kings, that be in our compass, into shame [[or reproof]], and into desolation in all peoples, among which the Lord scattered us.
BAR 2:5 And we be made beneath, and not above; for we sinned to our Lord God [[or to the Lord our God]], in not obeying to the voice of him.
BAR 2:6 Rightfulness is to our Lord God [[or To the Lord our God rightwiseness]], but shame of face is to us and to our fathers, as this day is.
BAR 2:7 For the Lord spake on us all these evils, that came on us.
BAR 2:8 And we besought not the face of our Lord God [[or the Lord our God]], that we should turn again, each of us from our worst ways.
BAR 2:9 And the Lord waked in evils, and brought those [[or them]] on us; for the Lord is just [[or rightwise]] in all his works, which he commanded to us.
BAR 2:10 And we heard not the voice of him, that we should go in the commandments of the Lord, which he gave before our face.
BAR 2:11 And now, Lord God of Israel, that leddest [[or broughtest]] thy people out of the land of Egypt in a strong hand, and in miracles [[or signs]], and in great wonders, and in thy great virtue, and in an high arm, and madest to thee a name, as this day is;
BAR 2:12 we have sinned, we have done unfaithfully [[or unpiously]], we have done wickedly, our Lord God, in all thy rightfulnesses, [[or Lord our God, in all thy rightwisenesses]].
BAR 2:13 Thy wrath be turned away from us; for we be left a few among heathen men, where thou hast scattered us.
BAR 2:14 Lord, hear thou our askings, and our prayers, and lead [[or bring]] us out for thee; and give thou to us to find grace before the face of them, that led us away;
BAR 2:15 that all earth know, that thou art our Lord God [[or thou art Lord our God]], and that thy name is called to help on Israel, and on the kin of him.
BAR 2:16 Lord, behold thou from thine holy house on us, and bow down thine ear, and hear us.
BAR 2:17 Open thine eyes, and see; for not dead men that be in hell, whose spirit is taken from their entrails, shall give honour [[or worship]] and justifying to the Lord;
BAR 2:18 but a soul which is sorry on the greatness [[or muchliness]] of evil, and goeth bowed, and sick [[or meeked]], and eyes failing, and an hungry soul [[or the soul hungering]], giveth glory to thee, and rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]] to the Lord.
BAR 2:19 For not by [[or after]] the rightwise-nesses of our fathers we poured out prayers, and asked mercy before thy sight, our Lord God [[or Lord our God]];
BAR 2:20 but for thou sentest thy wrath and thy strong vengeance on us, as thou spakest in the hands of thy children, prophets, and saidest,
BAR 2:21 Thus saith the Lord, Bow ye your shoulder[[s]], and your necks [[or your nolls]], and do ye travail to the king of Babylon; and ye shall sit in the land, which I gave to your fathers.
BAR 2:22 That if ye do not, neither hear the voice of your Lord God [[or the Lord our God]], to work to the king of Babylon,
BAR 2:23 I shall make your failing from the cities of Judah, and from the gates of Jerusalem; and I shall take away from you the voice of gladness [[or of mirth]], and the voice of joy, and the voice of spouse, and the voice of spousess; and all the land shall be without step of them that dwell therein.
BAR 2:24 And they heard not thy voice, that they should work to the king of Babylon; and thou hast set steadfastly thy words, which thou spakest in the hands of thy children, prophets; that the bones of our kings, and the bones of our fathers should be borne over [[or translated]] from their place.
BAR 2:25 And lo! they be cast forth in the heat of the sun, and in the frost of the night; and men be dead [[or they be dead]] in the worst sorrows, in hunger, and in sword, and in sending out.
BAR 2:26 And thou hast set the temple in which thy name was called to help, as this day showeth, for the wickedness of the house of Israel, and of the house of Judah.
BAR 2:27 And thou, our Lord God, hast done in us by all thy goodness, and by all that great merciful doing of thee, [[And thou hast done in us, Lord our God, after all thy goodness, and after all that thy great mercy doing,]]
BAR 2:28 as thou spakest in the hand of thy child Moses, in the day in which thou commandedest to him to write thy law, before the sons of Israel, and saidest,
BAR 2:29 If ye hear not my voice, this great adorning and much [[or this great multitude]] shall be turned into the least among heathen men, whither I shall scatter them.
BAR 2:30 For I knew, that the people shall not hear me, for it is a people of [[an]] hard noll. And it shall turn to their heart in the land of their captivity;
BAR 2:31 and they shall know, that I am the Lord God of them. And I shall give to them an heart, and they shall under-stand, and ears, and they shall hear.
BAR 2:32 And they shall praise me in the land of their captivity, and they shall be mindful of my name.
BAR 2:33 [[And]] They shall turn away them-selves from their hard back, and from their wickednesses; for they shall have mind of [[or shall remember]] the way of their fathers, that sinned against me.
BAR 2:34 And I shall again-call them into the land, which I swore to give to the fathers of them, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and they shall be lords of it. And I shall multiply them, and they [[shall]] not be made less.
BAR 2:35 And I shall ordain to them another testament everlasting, that I be to them into God, and they shall be to me into a people. And I shall no more move my people, the sons of Israel, from the land which I gave to them.
BAR 3:1 And now, Lord Almighty, God of Israel, a soul in anguishes, and a spirit annoyed [[or tormented]], crieth to thee.
BAR 3:2 Lord, hear thou, and have mercy, for thou art merciful, God; and have thou mercy on us, for we have sinned before thee,
BAR 3:3 thou [[or that]] sittest without end, and we shall not perish without end.
BAR 3:4 Lord God Almighty, God of Israel, hear thou now the prayer of the dead men of Israel, and of the sons of them, that [[have]] sinned before thee, and heard not the voice of their Lord God [[or of the Lord their God]], and evils be fastened [[or joined]] to us.
BAR 3:5 Do not thou have mind on the wickedness of our fathers, but have thou mind on thine hand, and on thy name, in this time;
BAR 3:6 for thou art our Lord God [[or thou art Lord our God]], and, Lord, we shall praise thee.
BAR 3:7 For why for this thing thou hast given thy dread in our hearts, that we call thy name to help [[or we inwardly call thy name]], and praise thee in our captivity; for we shall be converted [[or turned]] from the wickedness of our fathers, that sinned against thee.
BAR 3:8 And lo! we be in our captivity today, whither thou scatteredest us, into shame, and into cursing, and into sin, by [[or after]] all the wickedness of our fathers, that went away from thee, thou our Lord God [[or Lord our God]].
BAR 3:9 Israel, hear thou the command-ments of life; perceive thou with ears, that thou know prudence.
BAR 3:10 Israel, what is it, that thou art in the land of enemies? Thou waxedest eld in an alien land, thou art defouled with dead men,
BAR 3:11 thou art areckoned with them, that go down into hell?
BAR 3:12 Thou hast forsaken the well of wisdom;
BAR 3:13 for why if thou haddest gone in the ways of God, soothly thou haddest dwelled in peace on earth.
BAR 3:14 Learn thou, where is wisdom, where is prudence, where is virtue, where is understanding, that thou know altogether, where is long enduring [[or long abiding]] of life, and lifelode, where is light of eyes, and peace.
BAR 3:15 Who found the place thereof, and who entered into the treasures thereof?
BAR 3:16 Where be the princes of heathen men, and that be lords over the beasts, that be on earth?
BAR 3:17 Which played with the birds of heaven; which treasure silver and gold, in which men trust, and none end is [[or there is none end]] of the purchasing of them?
BAR 3:18 Which make silver, and be busy, and no finding is of their works?
BAR 3:19 They be destroyed, and went down to hells [[or to hell]]; and other men rose in the place of them.
BAR 3:20 The young men of them saw light, and dwelled on earth. But they knew not the way of wisdom [[or of discipline]],
BAR 3:21 neither understood the paths thereof; neither the sons of them received it. It was made far from the face of them;
BAR 3:22 it is not heard in the land of Canaan, neither [[it]] is seen in Teman.
BAR 3:23 Also the sons of Hagar, that sought out prudence which is of earth, the merchants of earth, and of Teman, and the tale tellers, [[or the fablers, or janglers]], and seekers out of prudence, and of understanding. But they knew not the way of wisdom, neither had mind on the paths thereof.
BAR 3:24 O! Israel, the house of God is full great, and the place of his possession is great; [[O! Israel, how great is the house of God, and how great the place of his possession;]]
BAR 3:25 it is great and hath none end, high and great without measure.
BAR 3:26 Named giants were there; they that were of great stature at the beginning, and knew battle.
BAR 3:27 The Lord chose not these, neither they found the way of wisdom [[or of discipline]]; therefore they perished.
BAR 3:28 And for they had not wisdom, they perished for their unwisdom.
BAR 3:29 Who ascended into heaven, and took that wisdom, and brought it down from the clouds?
BAR 3:30 Who passed over the sea, and found it, and brought it more than chosen gold?
BAR 3:31 None is [[or There is not]], that may know the way thereof, neither that seeketh [[out]] the paths thereof;
BAR 3:32 but he that have all things [[or that knoweth all things]], knew it, and found it by his prudence. Which made ready the earth in everlasting time, and filled it with two-footed beasts, and four-footed beasts.
BAR 3:33 Which sendeth out light, and it goeth, and called it; and it obeyeth to him in trembling.
BAR 3:34 Forsooth stars gave light in their keepings, and were glad; those were called, and those said, We be present; and those shined to him with mirth, that made those, [[or they be called, and they said, We come to; and they shined to him with mirth, that made them]].
BAR 3:35 This is our God, and none other shall be guessed against him.
BAR 3:36 This [[or He]] found each way of wisdom, and gave it to Jacob, his child, and to Israel, his darling [[or his dearworthy]].
BAR 3:37 After these things he was seen in lands, and lived with men.
BAR 4:1 This book of God’s behests [[or commandments]], and the law which is without end. All that hold it, shall come to life. But they that have forsaken it, shall come into death.
BAR 4:2 Jacob, be thou converted, and take thou [[or catch]] it; go thou by the way at the brightness thereof [[or walk by the way to the shining of it]], against the light thereof [[or the light of it]].
BAR 4:3 Give thou not thy glory to another, and thy dignity to an alien folk.
BAR 4:4 Israel, we be blessed; for those things that please God, be open [[or known]] to us.
BAR 4:5 The people of God, Israel worthy to be had in mind, be thou patienter, either of better comfort, [[or more stable]].
BAR 4:6 Ye be sold to heathen men, not into perdition; but for that that ye in ire stirred God to wrathfulness, ye be betaken to adversaries.
BAR 4:7 For ye wrathed that God ever-lasting, that made you; and ye offered to fiends, and not to God. [[Forsooth ye stirred to bitterness the everlasting God, that made you; offering to devils, and not to God.]]
BAR 4:8 For ye forgot him that nourished or nursed you, and ye made sorry [[or sorrowful]] your nurse, Jerusalem.
BAR 4:9 For it saw wrathfulness of God coming to you, and it said, Ye nigh coasts of Zion, hear; forsooth God hath brought great mourning to me.
BAR 4:10 For I saw the captivity of my people, of my sons and daughters, which he that is without beginning and end [[or the Everlasting]] brought on them.
BAR 4:11 For I nourished them with mirth; but I let them go with weeping and mourning.
BAR 4:12 No man have joy on me, a widow and desolate. I am forsaken of many, for the sins of my sons; for they bowed away from the law of God.
BAR 4:13 Forsooth they knew not rightful-nesses of him; neither they went [[or walked]] by the ways of God’s behests, neither by the paths of his truth they entered with rightfulness [[or with rightwiseness]].
BAR 4:14 The nigh coasts of Zion come, and have they mind [[or bethink they]] on the captivity of my sons and daughters, which he that is without beginning and end [[or the Everlasting]] brought on them.
BAR 4:15 For he brought on them a folk from afar, an evil folk, and of another language; that reverenced not an eld [[or old]] man, neither had mercy on children;
BAR 4:16 and they led away the dearworthy sons of a widow, and made a woman alone desolate of sons.
BAR 4:17 But what may I help you?
BAR 4:18 For he that brought on you evils [[or brought evil things upon you]], shall deliver you from the hands of your enemies.
BAR 4:19 Go ye, sons, go ye; for I am forsaken or left alone.
BAR 4:20 I have unclothed me of the stole, either long robe, of peace; but I have clothed me with a sackcloth of beseeching, and I shall cry to the Highest in my days.
BAR 4:21 Sons, be ye of better comfort [[or of better heart, or stabler]]; cry ye to the Lord, and he shall deliver you from the hand of princes, that be your enemies.
BAR 4:22 For I hoped your health without end, and joy came to me from the Holy on mercy, that shall come to you from your Saviour without beginning and end [[or that shall come to you of your Saviour Everlasting]].
BAR 4:23 For I sent you out with mourning and weeping; but God shall bring [[or shall lead]] you again to me, with joy and mirth without end.
BAR 4:24 For as the neighbouresses [[or the neighbours]] of Zion saw your captivity made of God, so they shall see and in swiftness [[or in haste]] your health of God, which health shall come to you from above, with great honour and everlasting shining.
BAR 4:25 Sons, suffer ye patiently ire [[or the wrath]] that came on you; for thine enemy pursued thee, but thou shalt see soon [[or but soon thou shalt see]] the perdition of him, and thou shalt go upon the necks of him.
BAR 4:26 My delicate men went sharp ways; for they as a flock that is ravished were led of enemies. [[My delicates, or nourished in delights, walked sharp ways; soothly they were led as a flock ravished with enemies.]]
BAR 4:27 Sons, be ye patienter [[or of evener heart, or stabler]], and cry ye [[a]] far to the Lord; for why your mind shall be of him that leadeth you.
BAR 4:28 For as your wit was, that ye erred from God [[or for to err from God]], ye shall convert again, and shall seek him ten times so much.
BAR 4:29 For he that brought in evils [[or evil things]] to you, shall bring again ever-lasting mirth to you with your health.
BAR 4:30 Jerusalem, be thou of better comfort; for he that named thee, exciteth thee. [[Jerusalem, be thou more stable, or of better heart; soothly he that named thee, admonisheth thee.]]
BAR 4:31 They that travailed thee, shall perish guilty; and they that thanked, [[or joyed]], in thy falling, shall be punished.
BAR 4:32 [[The]] Cities to which thy sons served, shall be punished, and that city that took thy sons, shall be punished.
BAR 4:33 For as Babylon made joy in thy hurling down [[or in thy falling]], and was glad in thy fall, so it shall be made sorry [[or shall be sorrowful]] in his desolation.
BAR 4:34 And the full out joy of the multitude thereof shall be cut away, and the joy thereof shall be into mourning.
BAR 4:35 For why fire shall come on it from him that is without beginning and end [[or the Everlasting]], in full long days; and it shall be inhabited of fiends [[or devils]], into the multitude [[or muchliness]] of time.
BAR 4:36 Jerusalem, behold about to the east, and see thou mirth coming of God to thee [[or see the mirth coming to thee of God]].
BAR 4:37 For lo! thy sons come, which [[or whom]] thou lettest go scattered; they come gathered from the east unto the west, in the word of the Holy, and make joy [[or joying]] to the honour of God.
BAR 5:1 Jerusalem, unclothe thee of the stole of thy mourning, and travailing [[or of thy travail]]; and clothe thou thee in [[or with]] the fairness, and honour of it, which is of God to thee in everlasting glory.
BAR 5:2 God of rightfulness shall encom-pass thee with a double cloth, and shall set on thine head a mitre of everlasting honour. [[Forsooth God shall environ thee with double cloth of rightwiseness, and shall put to thine head a mitre of everlasting honour.]]
BAR 5:3 For God shall show his brightness in thee, which is under heaven.
BAR 5:4 For thy name shall be named of God to thee without end, The peace of rightfulness [[or Peace of rightwise-ness]], and The honour of piety.
BAR 5:5 Jerusalem, rise up, and stand in an high place [[or in high]], and behold about to the east; and see thy sons gathered together from the sun rising till to the west, in the word of the Holy, that make joy [[or joying]] in the mind of God.
BAR 5:6 For they went out from thee, and were led of enemies on feet; but the Lord shall bring to thee them borne into honour, as the sons of realm [[or of kingdom]].
BAR 5:7 For God hath ordained to make low each high hill, and everlasting rocks of stones, and great valleys, to fill the unevenness of earth [[or to full-fill the even valleys into the evenness of earth]]; that Israel go diligently into the honour of God.
BAR 5:8 Forsooth the woods, and each tree of sweetness, shadowed Israel, by the commandment of God.
BAR 5:9 For God shall bring Israel with mirth, into [[or in]] the light of his majesty, with mercy and rightfulness [[or rightwiseness]], which is of him.
PRA 1:1 And they walked in the midst of the flame, and praised God, and blessed the Lord.
PRA 1:2 Forsooth Azariah stood, and prayed thus; and he opened his mouth in the midst of the fire, and said,
PRA 1:3 Lord, God of our fathers, thou art blessed, [[or Blessed art thou, Lord God of our Fathers]], and worthy to be praised, and thy name is glorious into worlds;
PRA 1:4 for thou art rightful in all things which thou didest to us, and all thy works be true; and thy ways be rightful [[or right]], and thy dooms be true.
PRA 1:5 For thou hast done true dooms, by [[or after]] all things which thou broughtest in on us, and on Jerusalem, the holy city of our fathers; for in truth and in doom, thou broughtest in all these things for our sins.
PRA 1:6 For we sinned, and did wickedly, going away from thee,
PRA 1:7 and we trespassed in all things, and we heard not, neither kept thy commandments, neither we did as thou commandedest to us, that it should be [[or that it were]] well to us.
PRA 1:8 Therefore thou didest by thy very doom all things which thou broughtest in on us, and all things which thou didest to us;
PRA 1:9 and thou hast betaken us in the hands of enemies, wicked men, and worst trespassers, and to the unjust king, and worst over all earth.
PRA 1:10 And now we may not open the mouth; we be made shame and reproof to thy servants, and to them that worship thee.
PRA 1:11 We beseech, give thou [[or betake]] not us to enemies without end, for thy name, and destroy thou not thy testament,
PRA 1:12 and take thou not away thy mercy from us, for Abraham, thy darling [[or thy dearworthy]], and Isaac, thy servant, and Israel, [[or Jacob]], thine holy;
PRA 1:13 to which thou spakest, promising that thou shouldest multiply their seed as the stars of heaven, and as gravel which is in the brink of the sea.
PRA 1:14 For why, Lord, we be made little, more than all folks [[or all heathen men]], and we be low in all earth today [[or we be meek in each land this day]], for our sins.
PRA 1:15 And in this time is no prince [[or there is not in this time prince]], and duke, and prophet, neither burnt sacrifice, neither sacrifice, neither offering, neither incense, neither place of first fruits before thee, that we may find thy mercy;
PRA 1:16 but be we received in contrite soul, and in spirit of meekness.
PRA 1:17 As in burnt sacrifice of rams, and of bulls, and as in thousands of fat lambs, so our sacrifice be made today in thy sight, that it please thee; for no shame [[or confusion]] is to them that trust in thee.
PRA 1:18 And now we pursue thee in all the heart, and we dread thee, and we seek thy face.
PRA 1:19 Shame thou not us, but do with us by [[or after]] thy mildness, and by [[or after]] the multitude of thy mercy.
PRA 1:20 And deliver thou us in thy marvels, and give thou glory to thy name, Lord; and all men be ashamed, that show evils to thy servants;
PRA 1:21 be they shamed in all thy might [[or power]], and the strength of them be all-broken [[or broken altogether]];
PRA 1:22 and they shall know, that thou art the Lord God alone, and glorious on the roundness of lands [[or of earths]].
PRA 1:23 And the ministers of the king, that had sent them, ceased not to make hot the furnace with cement [[or with naphtha]], and hards of flax [[or of hemp]], and pitch, and scions [[or cuttings]] of vines.
PRA 1:24 And the flame was shed [[or poured]] out over the furnace by nine and forty cubits,
PRA 1:25 and brake out, and burnt them that it found of Chaldees beside the furnace. [[and brake out, and burnt whom of Chaldees it found beside the furnace.]]
PRA 1:26 Forsooth the angel of the Lord came down with Azariah and his fellows, into the furnace, and smote out the flame of the fire from the furnace;
PRA 1:27 and made the midst of the furnace as the wind of dew blowing; and utterly the fire touched not them, neither made sorry [[or sorrowful]], neither did anything of dis-ease [[or brought in anything of heaviness]].
PRA 1:28 Then these three as of one mouth praised and glorified God, and blessed God in the furnace, and said,
PRA 1:29 Lord God of our fathers, thou art blessed [[or Blessed are thou, Lord God of our fathers]], and worthy to be praised, and glorious, and above enhanced into worlds;
PRA 1:30 and blessed is the name of thy glory, which name is holy, and worthy to be praised, and above enhanced [[or raised]] into all worlds.
PRA 1:31 Thou art blessed [[or Blessed art thou]] in the holy temple of thy glory, and above praiseable, and glorious into worlds.
PRA 1:32 Thou art blessed [[or Blessed art thou]] in the throne of thy realm, and above praiseable, and above enhanced [[or raised]] into worlds.
PRA 1:33 Thou art blessed [[or Blessed art thou]], that beholdest depths of waters [[or deepnesses]], and sittest [[up]] on cherubim, and praiseable, and above enhanced [[or raised]] into worlds.
PRA 1:34 Thou art blessed [[or Blessed art thou]] in the firmament of heaven, and praiseable, and glorious into worlds.
PRA 1:35 All works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:36 Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:37 Heavens, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:38 All waters that be above heavens, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:39 All the virtues of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:40 Sun and moon, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:41 Stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:42 Rain and dew, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:43 Each spirit of God, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:44 Fire and heat, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:45 Cold and summer, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:46 Dews and white frost, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:47 Black frost and cold, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:48 Ices and snows, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:49 Nights and days, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:50 Light and darkness, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:51 Lightnings and clouds, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:52 The earth bless the Lord; praise it, and above enhance [[or raise]] it him into worlds.
PRA 1:53 Mountains and little hills, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:54 All burgeoning things in earth, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:55 Wells, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:56 Seas and floods, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:57 Whales, and all things that be moved in waters, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:58 All birds of the air, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:59 All wild beasts and tame beasts, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:60 Sons of men, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:61 Israel, bless the Lord; praise it, and above enhance [[or raise]] it him into worlds.
PRA 1:62 Priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:63 Servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:64 Spirits and souls of just men, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:65 Holy men and meek of [[or in]] heart, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds.
PRA 1:66 Hananiah, Azariah, and Mishael, bless ye the Lord; praise ye, and above enhance [[or raise]] ye him into worlds. The which Lord ravished [[or delivered]] us from hell, and saved from the hand of death, and delivered us from the midst of flame burning [[or from the middle of the burning flame]], and ravished us from [[or out of]] the midst of [[the]] fire.
PRA 1:67 Acknowledge ye to the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy is into the world.
PRA 1:68 All religious men [[or All religious]], bless ye the Lord, God of gods; praise ye, and acknowledge to him, for his mercy is into all worlds.
2MA 1:1 To brethren Jews, that be scattered through Egypt, brethren, that be in Jerusalem, Jews, and that be in the country of Judea, say health and good peace.
2MA 1:2 God do well to you, and have mind of his testament, that he spake to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that be of the number of his true servants;
2MA 1:3 and give he heart to you all, that ye worship him, and do the will of him with great heart and willful soul.
2MA 1:4 Open he your heart in his law, and in his behests, and make he peace;
2MA 1:5 hear he graciously your prayers, and be reconciled to you, neither forsake you in evil time.
2MA 1:6 And now we be here praying for you.
2MA 1:7 While Demetrius reigneth in the hundred year and sixty and ninth, we Jews have written to you in tribula-tion and fierceness, that came above to us in these years, and since Jason went out of the holy land and realm.
2MA 1:8 They burnt the gate, and shedded out innocent blood; and we prayed to the Lord, and we be graciously heard, and we have offered sacrifice, and clean flour, and have tended lanterns, and have put forth loaves.
2MA 1:9 And now make ye solemn the days of Scenopegia, either cleansing of the temple, of the month Kislev, that is, November.
2MA 1:10 In the hundred year and eight and eightieth, the people that is in Jerusalem, and in Judea, and the elder men [[or the senate]], and Judas, to Aristobulus, master of Ptolemy, king, that is of the kin of anointed priests, and to them that be in Egypt, Jews, health of soul, and health of body.
2MA 1:11 We delivered of God from great perils, do thankings to him hugely, as we that have fought against such a king.
2MA 1:12 For he made for to boil out of Persia them that fought against us and the holy city.
2MA 1:13 For why when the duke himself was in Persia, and with him a great host, he fell in the temple of Nanea, and deceived by the counsel of the priests of Nanea.
2MA 1:14 Forsooth Antiochus came to the place, as to dwelling with him, and his friends, and for to take many riches [[or much monies]] by name of dower.
2MA 1:15 And when priests of Nanea had put forth those [[or had put them forth]], and he with few entered within the compass of the temple, they closed the temple, when Antiochus had entered.
2MA 1:16 And when the privy entry of the temple was opened, they threw stones, and smited the duke, and them that were with him, and they parted limb-meal; and when the heads were girded off, they casted withoutforth.
2MA 1:17 By all things blessed be God, that betook unpious men.
2MA 1:18 Therefore we to making purifying, or cleansing, of the temple, in the five and twentieth day of the month Kislev, that is, November, led needful for to signify to you, that and ye do also the day of Scenopegia, and the day of fire, that was given, when Nehemiah offered sacrifices, after that the temple and the altar were builded.
2MA 1:19 For why when our fathers were led into Persia, priests that then were worshippers of God, hid privily fire taken of the altar, in a valley, where was a deep pit and dry; and therein they kept it, so that the place was unknown to all men.
2MA 1:20 Forsooth when many years had passed, and it pleased God that Nehemiah was sent from the king of Persia, he sent the sons’ sons of the priests that hidden, for to seek the fire; and as they told to us, they found not fire, but fat water.
2MA 1:21 And he commanded them for to draw, and bring to him. And Nehemiah, the priest, commanded the sacrifices, that were put on, for to be sprinkled with the water, those and the trees, and those things that were put above.
2MA 1:22 And as this was done, and the time came, in which the sun shone again, that before was in cloud, a great fire was kindled, so that all men wondered.
2MA 1:23 Forsooth all priests made prayer, while the sacrifice was ended; and Jonathan began, and others forsooth answered.
2MA 1:24 And the prayer of Nehemiah was having this manner. Lord God, Maker of nought of all things, dreadful and strong, just and merciful, which alone art good King,
2MA 1:25 alone giving, alone just, and almighty, and without beginning and end, which deliverest Israel from all evil, which madest fathers chosen [[or chosen fathers]], and hallowedest them;
2MA 1:26 take thou sacrifice for all thy people Israel, and keep thy part, and hallow.
2MA 1:27 Gather our dispersion, or scattering, deliver them that serve to heathen men, and behold thou despised men, and made abominable, that heathen men know, that thou art our God.
2MA 1:28 Torment thou men oppressing us, and doing despite in pride.
2MA 1:29 Ordain thy people in thine holy place, as Moses said.
2MA 1:30 Forsooth priests sung hymns, till the sacrifice was ended.
2MA 1:31 Forsooth when the sacrifice was ended, Nehemiah commanded the more stones for to be beshed of the residue water;
2MA 1:32 and as this thing was done, flame was kindled of them, but it was wasted of the light, that again-shined of the altar.
2MA 1:33 Forsooth after the thing was known, it was told to the king of Persia, that in the place in which the priests that were translated, had hid fire, water appeared, of which Nehemiah and they that were with him cleansed sacrifices.
2MA 1:34 Forsooth the king beholding and diligently examining the thing, made a temple to him, for to prove that thing that was done.
2MA 1:35 And when he had proved, he gave many goods to priests, and other gifts; and he took with his hand, and he gave to them.
2MA 1:36 Forsooth Nehemiah called this place Nephthar, that is interpreted, either expounded, cleansing; forsooth with many it is called Naphtha.
2MA 2:1 Forsooth it is found in writings [[or in describings]] of Jeremy, the prophet, that he commanded them that passed over, for to take fire, as it is signified, and as he bade to men passing over, or captive.
2MA 2:2 And he gave to them the law, lest they forgot the behests of the Lord; and that they should not err in souls, [[or understandings]], seeing golden and silvern simulacra, and ornaments or adornments of them.
2MA 2:3 And he said other such things, and admonished, that they should not remove the law from their hearts.
2MA 2:4 Soothly it was in that writing, how the prophet bade, by God’s answer made to him, that the tabernacle and the ark follow with them, till he went out into the hill in which Moses ascended, and saw the heritage of God.
2MA 2:5 And Jeremy came, and found there a place of [[a]] den, and brought in thither the tabernacle, and the ark, and altar of incense, and stopped the door.
2MA 2:6 And some men came together that followed, for to mark the place to them, and [[they]] might not find.
2MA 2:7 Forsooth as Jeremy knew, he blamed them, and said, that the place shall be unknown, till God gather the congregation [[together]] of people, and be made helpful, or merciful.
2MA 2:8 And then the Lord shall show these things, and the majesty of the Lord shall appear; and a cloud shall be, as to Moses it was showed, and as when Solomon asked, that the place should be hallowed to the great God, this cloud showed;
2MA 2:9 and as having wisdom, he offered sacrifice of hallowing, and of perform-ing of the temple.
2MA 2:10 As and Moses prayed to the Lord, and fire came down from heaven, and wasted the burnt sacrifices; as and Solomon prayed, and fire came down from heaven, and wasted the burnt sacrifice[[s]].
2MA 2:11 And Moses said, For that it is not cleansed, that was for sin, and it was wasted.
2MA 2:12 Also and Solomon in eight days made solemn the hallowing.
2MA 2:13 Forsooth and these same things were put in descriptions, and expo-sitions of Nehemiah; and as he made a little bible, and gathered books of countries, and of prophets, and of David, and epistles of kings, and gifts.
2MA 2:14 Also soothly and Judas gathered all those things which he learned by battle, that befell to us, and they be with us.
2MA 2:15 Therefore if ye desire these, send ye which shall bear to you.
2MA 2:16 Therefore we doing purifying, have written to you; therefore ye shall do well, if ye shall do these days.
2MA 2:17 Forsooth it is God that delivered his people, and yielded his heritage to all, and realm, and priesthood, and hallowing,
2MA 2:18 as he promised in the law, we hope that soon he shall have mercy on us, and shall gather from under heaven into the holy place; for he delivered us from great perils, and purged the place.
2MA 2:19 Soothly of Judas Maccabeus, and his brethren, and of purifying of the great temple, and of hallowing of the altar;
2MA 2:20 but and of the battles, that pertain to Antiochus the noble or Epiphanes, and his son Eupator;
2MA 2:21 and of lightnings that were made from heaven, to them that strongly did for Jews, so that, when they were few, they avenged all the country, and drove an heathen multitude,
2MA 2:22 and recovered the most famous temple in all the world; and delivered the city, that the laws that were done away were restored; for the Lord was made helpful to them, with all peace-ability.
2MA 2:23 And also we attempted or assayed for to abridge in one book, things comprehended of Jason of Cyrene in five books.
2MA 2:24 Forsooth we beheld or beholding the multitude and hardness of books, to men willing for to begin the tellings of stories, for multitude of things;
2MA 2:25 and soothly we had busyness [[or we cared]], that it were delectation, or liking, of soul to men willing for to read; forsooth to studious men, that they might lightlier betake to mind; forsooth that to all men reading profit be given.
2MA 2:26 And soothly we took to us-selves [[or ourselves]] that received this work, by cause of abridging, not easy travail, but soothly a work full of wakings and [[of]] sweat.
2MA 2:27 As these that make ready a feast, and seek for to please to the will of other men, for grace of many men, we suffer willfully travail;
2MA 2:28 forsooth we grant the truth of all authors, but we us-self [[or we our-selves]] study to shortness, by the form given.
2MA 2:29 Forsooth as it is to the chief carpenter [[or the wright]] of a new house, to be busy of all the building; to him soothly that busyeth for to paint, those things be to be sought out, that be covenable to adorning; so it is to be guessed also in us.
2MA 2:30 Forsooth for to gather under-standing, and ordain a word, and full busily for to inquire all parts of the story, each by themselves, accordeth to an author;
2MA 2:31 forsooth for to pursue shortness of saying, and for to eschew out pursuings of things, is to be granted to the abridger.
2MA 2:32 Therefore from henceforth we shall begin the telling; be it enough for to have said so much of prefaction, or before-speaking; for it is folly for to float out, either be long, before the story, but in that story for to be made short.
2MA 3:1 Therefore when the holy city was inhabited in all peace, laws also yet were best kept, for the faithfulness of Onias, bishop, [[or for ordinance and piety of Onias, priest]], and for souls hating evil things,
2MA 3:2 it was made, that both they kings and princes led the place worthy highest honour, and lighted the temple with greatest gifts;
2MA 3:3 so that Seleucus, king of Asia, gave of his rents all expenses pertain-ing to the service of sacrifices.
2MA 3:4 Forsooth Simon, of the lineage of Benjamin, that was ordained sovereign [[or provost]] of the temple, when the prince of priests against-stood him, strove for to cast some wicked thing in the city.
2MA 3:5 But when he might not overcome Onias, he came to Apollonius, son of Tarsus, that in that time was duke of Coelesyria and Phoenicia;
2MA 3:6 and told to him, that the treasury in Jerusalem was full with riches [[or with monies]] unnumberable; and that common riches be great, which pertain not to the reason of sacrifices; forsooth that it was possible, that all things fall under power of the king.
2MA 3:7 And when Apollonius had told to the king of riches [[or monies]] that were borne in, he sent Heliodorus called, that was on his needs, with commandments for to bear out the foresaid money.
2MA 3:8 And anon Heliodorus took the way, soothly by form as if he were to passing by Coelesyria and Phoenicia cities, but in true thing to performing the king’s purpose.
2MA 3:9 But when he came to Jerusalem, and was received benignly of the highest priest in the city, he told of doom given of the riches [[or of monies]], and opened for cause of what thing he came; forsooth he asked, if verily these things were so.
2MA 3:10 Then the highest priest showed, that these things were kept to the lifelodes [[or the livelodes]] of widows, and of fatherless either motherless children;
2MA 3:11 that some soothly were of Hyrcanus son of Tobias, a man full noble in these things, that unpious Simon had told; forsooth that all the talents of silver were four hundred, and of gold two hundred;
2MA 3:12 for that it was impossible on all manner, that they be deceived, that betook their things to be kept to the place and temple, that by all the world was honoured for his worship-ping, and holiness.
2MA 3:13 And he said, for these things that he had in commandments of the king, That in all kind those should be borne to the king.
2MA 3:14 Forsooth in the day ordained Heliodorus entered, to ordain of these things; forsooth there was not a little trembling through all the city.
2MA 3:15 Forsooth priests casted themselves before the altar, with priests’ stoles, and called to help from heaven him that gave law of things put in keeping, that he should keep those things safe to them that had put those [[or had put them]] in keeping.
2MA 3:16 Now forsooth he that saw the cheer of the highest priest, was wounded in soul; for the face and colour was changed, and declared the inward sorrow of soul.
2MA 3:17 For some sorrowfulness was shed about to the man, and hideousness of body, by which the sorrow of heart was made known to men beholding.
2MA 3:18 Also other men gathered together flock-meal, and came out of houses, beseeching with open beseeching, for that that the place was to coming into despite.
2MA 3:19 And women were gird on the breast with hair-shirts, and flowed together by streets; but and virgins, that were closed altogether, ran to Onias; others forsooth to the walls, some soothly beheld by windows.
2MA 3:20 Forsooth all held forth hands into heaven, and besought;
2MA 3:21 for there was a wretched abiding of multitude mingled, and of the highest priest ordained in strife, or anguish.
2MA 3:22 And these soothly called Almighty God to help, that things taken in keeping should be kept in all holiness, to them that had put those [[or had put them]] in keeping.
2MA 3:23 Forsooth Heliodorus performed that thing, that he had deemed,
2MA 3:24 and he was present with his knights in the same place about the treasury. But the Spirit of Almighty God made great evidence of his showing, so that all that were hardy for to obey to him, fell down by virtue of God, and were converted into feebleness, [[or unstrength]], and inward dread.
2MA 3:25 For an horse appeared to them, and had a dreadful sitter, adorned with best coverings; and he with fierceness rushed the former feet or forefeet to Heliodorus; forsooth he that sat on him, seemed [[or was seen]] for to have golden armours.
2MA 3:26 Also two other young men appeared, fair in virtue, best in glory, and fair in clothing, that stood about him, and on each side scourged him without ceasing, and beat with many wounds.
2MA 3:27 Soothly forsooth Heliodorus fell down to the earth, and they ravished him shed about with much darkness, and casted out him [[or casted him out]], put in a pack saddle, either horse’s litter.
2MA 3:28 And he that entered with many runners and knights into the foresaid treasury, was borne, when no man helped him, for the open virtue of God was known;
2MA 3:29 and forsooth by God’s virtue he lay dumb, and deprived of all hope and health.
2MA 3:30 Forsooth these Jews blessed the Lord, for he magnified his place; and the temple, that a little before was full of dread and noise, is [[full]]-filled with joy and gladness, for the Lord Almighty appeared.
2MA 3:31 Then forsooth some of Heliodorus’ friends prayed anon Onias, for to call to help the Highest, and for to give life to him, that was set in the last spirit.
2MA 3:32 Soothly the highest priest beheld, lest peradventure the king would suppose any malice fully done of Jews about Heliodorus, and offered for health of the man a wholeful or an healthful sacrifice.
2MA 3:33 And when the highest priest prayed, the same younglings, clothed in the same clothes, stood nigh [[to]] Heliodorus, and said, Do thou thankings to Onias, the priest; for why for him the Lord hath given life to thee;
2MA 3:34 thou soothly, that art scourged of God, tell to all men the great doings and power of God. And when these things were said, they appeared not.
2MA 3:35 Heliodorus soothly, when a sacrifice was offered to God, and great avows were promised to him, that granted him for to live, and did thankings or thanks to Onias; and when his host was received, he went again to the king.
2MA 3:36 Soothly he witnessed to all men the works of great God, which he saw under his eyes.
2MA 3:37 Forsooth when the king asked Heliodorus, who was able to be sent yet once to Jerusalem, he said,
2MA 3:38 If thou hast any enemy, either traitor of thy realm, send thither, and thou shalt receive him beaten, if nevertheless he shall escape; for some virtue of God is verily in the place.
2MA 3:39 For why he that hath dwelling in heavens, is visitor and helper of that place; and he smiteth and loseth them, that come to mis-do.
2MA 3:40 Therefore of Heliodorus, and keeping of the treasury, thus the thing hath itself.
2MA 4:1 Simon forsooth before-said, accuser of riches [[or of monies]], and of the country, spake evil of Onias, as if he had stirred Heliodorus to these things, and he had been stirrer of evils;
2MA 4:2 and he durst say the purveyor of the city, and defender of his folk, and lover of the law of God, traitor [[or enemy]] of the realm.
2MA 4:3 But when enmities came forth in so much, that also by some familiar, [[or nigh]], friends of Simon, man-slayings were done,
2MA 4:4 Onias beheld the peril of strife, and that Apollonius was mad, as duke of Coelesyria and Phoenicia, for to increase the malice of Simon.
2MA 4:5 And Onias gave himself to the king; not as accuser of citizens, but beholding with himself the common profit of all the multitude.
2MA 4:6 For he saw, that it was impossible that peace were given to things with-out the king’s purveyance, and that Simon might not cease of his folly.
2MA 4:7 But after the passing out of Seleucus’ life, when Antiochus, that was called noble or Epiphanes, had taken realm, Jason, the brother of Onias, coveted the highest or the high priesthood;
2MA 4:8 and Jason went to the king, and promised to him three hundred talents and sixty of silver, and of other rents fourscore talents;
2MA 4:9 over these things he promised also other talents an hundred and fifty, if it were granted to his power, for to ordain a school, and gathering of young men to him; and for to write them that were in Jerusalem Antioch-enes, or men of Antioch.
2MA 4:10 And when the king had granted this, and he wielded the princehood, anon he began to translate to heathen customs, men of his lineage.
2MA 4:11 And when these things were done away, which by cause of humanity, either courtesy, were ordained of kings to Jews by John, the father of Eupolemus, which was ordained in lawful message of friendship and fellowship with Romans, he destroyed rights, or laws, of citizens, and made shrewd ordinances;
2MA 4:12 for he was hardy for to ordain a school of heathenness under that high tower, and for to put all the best of fair young men in bordel houses.
2MA 4:13 Forsooth this was not beginning, but some increasing and profit of heathen and alien life, for the unleaveful and unheard great trespass of unpiousness, and not priest Jason;
2MA 4:14 so that priests not now were given about offices of the altar, but they despised the temple, and left sacrifices, and they hasted for to be made fellows of wrestling or rassling, and of unjust giving of him, that is, of his giving of worst teaching, and in occupations of a dish, either playing with a leaden discus.
2MA 4:15 And soothly they had honours of fathers at nought, and deemed Greek glories best.
2MA 4:16 For cause of which perilous contention had them, and they followed their ordinances; and by all things they coveted them for to be like them, which [[or whom]] they had enemies and destroyers.
2MA 4:17 Forsooth for to do unfaithfully [[or unpiously]] against God’s laws it befall-eth not without pain, but the time pursuing shall declare these things.
2MA 4:18 Soothly when justice, done once in five years, was made solemnly in Tyre, and the king was present,
2MA 4:19 Jason, full of great trespasses, sent from Jerusalem men sinners, bearing three hundred double drachmas of silver into sacrifice of Hercules; which these men that bare out asked, that those [[or they]] were not given in sacrifices, for it needed not, but that those shall be ordained into other expenses.
2MA 4:20 But soothly these were offered of him that sent into the sacrifice of Hercules; soothly for men present, those [[or they]] were given into making of great ships.
2MA 4:21 Forsooth Apollonius, son of Menestheus, was sent into Egypt for primates, or princes, of Ptolemy Philometor, the king; when Antiochus knew him made alien from needs of the realm, he counselled for [[or to]] his own profits, and went from thence, and came to Joppa, and from thence to Jerusalem.
2MA 4:22 And he was received of Jason and the city worshipfully, with lights of brands, and praisings, and went in, and from thence he turned the host into Phoenicia.
2MA 4:23 And after the time of three years, Jason sent Menelaus, the brother of Simon above-said, bearing riches [[or monies]] to the king, and of necessary causes to bearing answers.
2MA 4:24 And he was commended to the king, and, when he had magnified the face of his power, he turned in to himself the highest priesthood, and setted above Jason [[or above putting to Jason]] three hundred talents of silver.
2MA 4:25 And by commandments taken of the king, he came, soothly having nothing worthy to priesthood; but he bare the soul of a cruel tyrant, and wrath of [[a]] wild beast.
2MA 4:26 And soothly that Jason, that took his own brother captive, was deceived, and was outlawed, and put out into the country of Ammonites.
2MA 4:27 But Menelaus forsooth wielded the princehood, but of riches promised to the king, he did nothing, when Sostratus, that was sovereign of the high tower, made exaction, or master-ful asking, [[or that was provost of the high rock, made exaction, or unjust asking]],
2MA 4:28 for why raising [[or extraction]] of tributes pertained to him; for which cause both were called to the king.
2MA 4:29 And Menelaus was removed from priesthood, and Lysimachus, his brother, was successor; soothly Sostratus was made sovereign of men of Cyprus.
2MA 4:30 And when these things were done, it befell Tarsus and Mallus for to move debate, for that they were given in gift to the concubine of Antiochus, the king.
2MA 4:31 Therefore the king hastily came, for to assuage them, and left one of his earls suffectus or suffect consuls, Andronicus, in dignity, or lieutenant.
2MA 4:32 Forsooth Menelaus deemed that he had taken covenable time, and stole some golden vessels of the temple, and gave to Andronicus, and he sold to Tyre others, and by nigh cities.
2MA 4:33 And when Onias had known this thing most certainly, he reproved him, and held himself in a secure place at Antiochia, beside Daphne.
2MA 4:34 Wherefore Menelaus went to Andronicus, and prayed that he would slay Onias. And when he came to Onias, and had given right hands with an oath, though he was suspect to him, he counselled him for to go forth of asylum, and anon he slew him, and dreaded not rightwiseness.
2MA 4:35 For which cause not only Jews, but and other nations, were wroth, and bare heavily of the unjust death of so great a man.
2MA 4:36 But Jews at Antioch, and Greeks, together complained of the unjust death of Onias, and went to the king, that turned again from places of Cilicia.
2MA 4:37 Therefore the king Antiochus was sorry in soul for Onias, and was bowed to mercy, and shedded tears, and bethought on the soberness and mildness of the dead man.
2MA 4:38 And his heart was kindled, and he commanded that Andronicus, unclothed of purple, be led about by all the city, and that in that place in which he had done unpiously against Onias, the cursed man be deprived of life; for the Lord gave to him even-worthy pain.
2MA 4:39 Forsooth when many sacrileges were done of Lysimachus, by counsel of Menelaus, in the temple, and the fame was published, [[a]] multitude was gathered against Lysimachus; for much gold was then borne out.
2MA 4:40 Forsooth when the companies rose, and souls were filled with wrath, Lysimachus began for to use almost three thousand armed wicked hands, by some tyrant leader, eld [[or old]] in age, and also in madness.
2MA 4:41 But as they understood the endeavouring of Lysimachus, others took stones, others strong staffs, some soothly casted ashes into Lysimachus.
2MA 4:42 And many soothly were wounded, some forsooth were cast down, all forsooth were altogether turned into flight; also they slew him sacrileger, either thief of holy things, beside the treasury.
2MA 4:43 Therefore of these things doom began for to be moved against Menelaus.
2MA 4:44 And when the king came to Tyre, three men were sent of the elder men, and brought the cause to him.
2MA 4:45 And when Menelaus was over-come, he promised for to give many riches [[or many monies]] to Ptolemy, for to counsel the king.
2MA 4:46 Therefore Ptolemy went to the king, set in some porch, as for cause of refreshing, either colding, [[or cooling]], and led away from sentence;
2MA 4:47 and assoiled or absolved from crimes Menelaus, guilty truly of all the malice. Forsooth he damned or condemned by death these wretches, which should be deemed innocents, yea, if they had led cause with Scythians.
2MA 4:48 Therefore soon they gave unjust pain to them, that pursued cause for the city, and [[for the]] people, and holy vessels.
2MA 4:49 Wherefore and men of Tyre were wroth, and were most liberal with the burying of them.
2MA 4:50 Forsooth for covetousness of them that were in power, Menelaus dwelt in power, waxing in malice, and to deceits of citizens.
2MA 5:1 In the same time Antiochus made ready the second going into Egypt.
2MA 5:2 Forsooth it befell, that by each city of men of Jerusalem, were seen by forty days, horsemen running about by the air, having golden stoles, and shafts, as companies of knights armed;
2MA 5:3 and courses of horses wisely set by orders, and assailings, or fightings together, for to be made nigh, and movings of shields, and multitude of helmeted men, with unrestrained swords, and castings of darts, and shining of golden armours, and of all kind of habergeons.
2MA 5:4 Wherefore all men prayed, that the monsters, or wonders, tokens of things to coming, be converted [[or be altogether turned]] into good.
2MA 5:5 But when false tiding [[or false rumour]] went out, as if Antiochus had gone out of life, Jason suddenly assailed the city, with men taken not less than a thousand; and when citizens fled to the wall together, and at the last the city was taken, Menelaus fled into the high tower.
2MA 5:6 Forsooth Jason spared not in slay-ing his citizens, neither he thought prosperity against cousins; and he deemed it for to be most evil, that he should take victories of enemies, and not of citizens.
2MA 5:7 And soothly he wielded not princehood, but took confusion end of his deceits or his espies; and he flew again, and went into Ammonites.
2MA 5:8 And at the last into undoing of him, he was enclosed altogether of Aretas, tyrant of Arabians, and flew [[or fleeing]] from city into city, and was odious to all men, as apostate, or forsaker of laws, and abominable, as enemy of country and citizens, and was cast out into Egypt.
2MA 5:9 And he that had put out many of their country, perished in pilgrimage, and went to Lacedaemonians, as for cousinage to have there refuge.
2MA 5:10 And he that had casted away many unburied, is cast out both unwailed and unburied, and neither useth strange sepulchre, neither taketh part of fathers’ sepulchre.
2MA 5:11 And when these things were done so, the king supposed, that Jews should forsake fellowship; and for this he went out of Egypt with mad souls, and took the city soothly with arms.
2MA 5:12 Forsooth he commanded to the knights, for to slay, neither [[to]] spare to men running against, and to go up by houses, and strangle.
2MA 5:13 Therefore there were made slayings of young and elder, destroyings of women and children, and deaths of maidens and little children.
2MA 5:14 Forsooth in all three days, fourscore thousand were slain, forty thousand bound, forsooth not less sold;
2MA 5:15 but neither these things sufficed. Also he was hardy for to enter into the temple holier than all the land, by Menelaus leader, that was traitor of laws and country.
2MA 5:16 And he touched unworthily, and defouled, taking in cursed hands the holy vessels, that were put of other kings and cities, to adorning and glory of the place.
2MA 5:17 Antiochus was so alienated from mind, or understanding, and beheld not, that, for sins of men inhabiting, the Lord was wroth a little to the city; for which thing also despising befell about the place.
2MA 5:18 Else if it had not befallen them for to be wrapped in many sins, as Heliodorus, that was sent from king Seleucus for to rob the treasury, also this anon coming should be beaten, and forsooth put aback from hardiness.
2MA 5:19 But the Lord chose not the folk for the place, but place for the folk.
2MA 5:20 And therefore also that place was made partner of evils of the people; afterward forsooth it shall be made fellow also of goods, and it, that is forsaken in wrath of Almighty God, again in reconciling of the great Lord, shall be enhanced with great glory.
2MA 5:21 Therefore Antiochus, when he had taken away a thousand and eight hundred talents of the temple, swiftly turned again to Antiochia, and deemed him for pride to lead the land for to sail, the sea forsooth for to make journey, for pride of soul.
2MA 5:22 Forsooth he left also sovereigns, to torment the folk, in Jerusalem soothly Philip, of the kin of Phyrgians, crueler than himself in manners [[or in manners crueler than himself]], of whom he was ordained;
2MA 5:23 forsooth in Gerizim, Andronicus and Menelaus, which more grievously than others lay on, [[or annoyed]], citizens. And when he was set against Jews,
2MA 5:24 he sent an odious prince, Apollonius, with an host two and twenty thousands, and commanded to him [[or commanding to him]] for to slay all of perfect age, for to sell women and young children.
2MA 5:25 Which when he came to Jerusalem, feigned peace, and rested till the holy day of sabbath. And then while Jews held holiday, or the holy day, he commanded his men for to take arms,
2MA 5:26 and [[he]] strangled all that came forth together to the spectacle, or beholding; and he ran about the city with armed men, and slew a great multitude.
2MA 5:27 Forsooth Judas Maccabeus, that was the tenth, went into desert place, and there led life with men, among wild beasts in hills; and [[they]] dwelt eating meat of hay, lest they were partners of defouling.
2MA 6:1 But not after much time, the king sent an eld [[or old]] man of Antiochia, which should constrain Jews, that they should translate [[or transfer]] them-selves from laws of fathers, and of God;
2MA 6:2 also he should defoul the temple in Jerusalem, and should call it of Jupiter Olympus, and in Gerizim, as they were, that inhabited the place, of Jupiter Hospitality.
2MA 6:3 Forsooth the falling in of evils was worst and grievous to all;
2MA 6:4 for why the temple was full of lechery and gluttony of heathen men, and of men doing lechery with whores, and women bare in them-selves to hallowed houses, at their own will, bearing within those things which it was not leaveful.
2MA 6:5 Also the altar was full of unleaveful things, which were forbidden by laws.
2MA 6:6 Soothly neither sabbaths were kept, neither solemn days of fathers were kept, neither simply, neither openly, [[or plainly]], any man acknowl-edged him a Jew.
2MA 6:7 Forsooth they were led with bitter need in the day of the king’s birth to sacrifices. And when holy things of Liber, that is Bacchus, either a false god, which the heathen men called god of wine, were made solemnly, [[or were hallowed]], they were crowned with ivy, and were constrained for to go about with Liber.
2MA 6:8 Soothly the doom went out into the next cities of heathen men, by Ptolemais procuring, that in like manner also they should do against Jews, that they should do sacrifice;
2MA 6:9 soothly that they should slay them, that would not pass to the ordinances of heathen men. Therefore it was to see wretchedness [[or it was wretched-ness for to see these things]].
2MA 6:10 For why two women were accused, that they had circumcised their children; and when they had led them about openly by the city, with [[the]] infants hanged at their breasts, they casted [[them]] down by the walls.
2MA 6:11 Forsooth other men went together to the next dens, and hallowed privily the day of sabbath, when they were showed to Philip, they were burnt in flames, for they dreaded for religion and observance, for to bear help to themselves with hand.
2MA 6:12 Therefore I beseech them, that shall read this book, that they dread not for adversities; but areckon they those things that befell to be not to perishing, but to [[or for]] amending of our kin.
2MA 6:13 For why for to not suffer by much time sinners for to do of sentence, [[or doom]], but anon for to give venge-ances, is the showing of great benefice.
2MA 6:14 For why, not as in other nations, the Lord abideth patiently, that when the day of doom shall come, he punish them in plenty of sins, so and in us he ordaineth,
2MA 6:15 that when our sins be turned about into end, so at the last he avenge on us.
2MA 6:16 For which thing soothly he never removeth his mercy from us; but he chastiseth his people, and forsaketh not in adversities.
2MA 6:17 But these things be said of us [[or be said to you]] in few words to the admonishing of men reading; now forsooth it is to come to the telling.
2MA 6:18 Therefore Eleazar, one of the former of the scribes, or men of law, and a man waxed in age, and fair in cheer, was compelled, yawning with open mouth, for to eat swine’s flesh.
2MA 6:19 And he embraced, or chose, more glorious death, than hateful life, and willfully went before to torment.
2MA 6:20 Forsooth he beheld how it behooved for to go, and suffered patiently, and ordained for to not do unleaveful things for the love of life.
2MA 6:21 Soothly these that stood nigh, were moved altogether by wicked mercy, for eld [[or old]] friendship of the man, and they took him privily, and prayed that fleshes should be brought, which it was leaveful to him for to eat, that he were feigned to have eaten, as the king commanded, of the flesh of sacrifice;
2MA 6:22 that by this deed he should be delivered from death; and for eld [[or old]] friendship of the man, they did this humanity, or courtesy, in him.
2MA 6:23 And he began for to think the worthy excellence of age, and of his eld age, and the free-born hoariness of nobility, and of best living from child[[hood]]; and by [[or after]] the ordinances of holy law, and made of God, he answered soon, saying, that he would be sent before into hell.
2MA 6:24 For he said, It is not worthy to our age for to feign, that many young men deem, that Eleazar of fourscore year and ten, hath passed to the life of aliens,
2MA 6:25 and that they be deceived by my feigning, and that for little time of corruptible life, and that by this I get spot and execration, or cursedness, to mine eld age.
2MA 6:26 For why though in present time I be delivered from torments of men, but neither quick, neither dead, I shall not escape the hand of [[the]] Almighty.
2MA 6:27 Wherefore in passing the life strongly, that is, in dying for the law of God, soothly I shall appear worthy of age;
2MA 6:28 forsooth I shall leave strong ensample to young men, if I use perfectly honest death with ready will, and strongly for the worthiest and holiest laws. When these things were said, anon he was drawn to torment.
2MA 6:29 Forsooth these that led him, and a little before were milder, were turned into wrath, for the words said of him, which they deemed brought forth by pride of heart.
2MA 6:30 But when he should be slain with wounds, he sorrowed inwardly, and said, Lord, that hast holy knowing, openly thou knowest, that when I might be delivered from death, I suffer hard sorrows of body; forsooth by soul willfully I suffer these things, for thy dread.
2MA 6:31 And soothly this man on [[or in]] this manner departed from life; not only leaving the mind of his death to young men, but and to all the folk, to ensample of virtue and strength.
2MA 7:1 Forsooth it befell, that seven brethren taken together with the mother, were constrained of the king, for to taste against the law swine’s flesh; and were tormented with scourgings, and torment made of bull’s leather.
2MA 7:2 Forsooth one of them, that was the first, said thus, What seekest thou? and what wilt thou learn of us? we be ready for to die, more than to break the fathers’ laws of God.
2MA 7:3 Therefore the king was wroth, and commanded brazen pans [[or pans of brass]], and brass pots for to be made full hot.
2MA 7:4 And when those anon were made full hot [[or tended]], he commanded the tongue for to be cut off from him that spake first; and when the skin of the head was drawn away, he bade both the highest parts of his hands and of his feet for to be cut off, the while the other brethren of him and the mother of him beheld.
2MA 7:5 And when he was made then [[or made now]] unprofitable by all things, he commanded fire for to be brought to him, and yet all quick, breathing, or groaning, for to be burnt in the brazen pan; in which when he was long tormented, the others together with the mother, admonished them together for to die strongly, saying,
2MA 7:6 The Lord God shall behold truth, and shall give comfort, or give solace, in us, as Moses declared in before-witnessing of his song, And in his servants he shall give comfort.
2MA 7:7 Therefore when that first was dead in this manner, they led forth the next for to be scorned; and when the skin of his head was drawn off, with the hairs, they asked, if he would eat, before that he were punished in all the body, by all members by themselves.
2MA 7:8 And he answered by the [[country]] voice of fathers, and said, I shall not do it. For which thing, and this in pursuing place, received like torments of the first.
2MA 7:9 And when he was ordained in the last spirit, he said thus, Soothly thou most wicked, or cursed, losest us in this life, but the King of the world shall raise us that be dead for his laws, in again-rising of everlasting life.
2MA 7:10 After this the third was scorned; and when he was bidden, he proffered soon forth his tongue, and steadfastly held forth his hands,
2MA 7:11 and said with trust, Of heaven I wield these limbs, but for the laws of God now I despise these same; for I hope, that I shall receive those [[or them]] of him.
2MA 7:12 So that the king, and they that were with him, wondered on the wisdom of the young man, that he led the torments as nought.
2MA 7:13 And when this was thus dead, they travailed the fourth, and tormented him in like manner.
2MA 7:14 And when he was then at the death, he said thus, Well the rather it is need [[or Rather it is]], that men given to death of men, abide the hope of God, for they shall be raised-again again of him; forsooth again-rising to life shall not be to thee.
2MA 7:15 And when they had brought the fifth, they travailed him.
2MA 7:16 And he beheld into him, and said, Thou hast power among men, and though thou be corruptible, thou doest what thou wilt; but do not thou guess, that our kin is forsaken of God.
2MA 7:17 But abide thou patiently, and thou shalt see the great power of him, how he shall torment thee, and thy seed.
2MA 7:18 After [[this]] they brought also the sixth; and this began for to die, and said thus, [[or this beginning for to die, saith thus]], Do not thou err idly; for we suffer these things for ourselves, sinning against our God, and things worthy of wondering be made in us;
2MA 7:19 but deem thou not, that it shall be without pain to thee, that thou hast tempted for to fight against God.
2MA 7:20 Forsooth the marvellous mother of them/Forsooth the mother is wonderful above manner, and worthy the mind of good men, which beheld seven sons perishing under the time of one day, and suffered above manner with good will, for the hope that she had into God;
2MA 7:21 she admonished each of them by voice of fathers [[or of country]], and was strongly filled with wisdom, and setted man’s wit to woman’s thought, and said to them,
2MA 7:22 Sons, I know not how ye appeared in my womb; for neither I have given to you spirit, and soul, and life, and I myself joined not together the members of each;
2MA 7:23 but [[or soothly]] the Maker of nought of the world, that formed the nativity of man, and found beginning of all, shall yield again to you spirit, and life, with mercy, as now ye despise yourselves for the laws of him.
2MA 7:24 Forsooth Antiochus deemed him for to be despised, and also by despisable voice of a reprover [[or also despised by voice of the reproving]], and when yet the younger was alive, not only he admonished by words, but with an oath he affirmed to make him rich and blissful, or blessful, [[or blessed]], and to have him a friend, translated from laws of fathers, and to give to him needful things.
2MA 7:25 But when the young man was not bowed to these things, the king called the mother, and softly counselled her, that she should be made to the young man into health.
2MA 7:26 Forsooth when he admonished her by many words, she promised him for to counsel her son.
2MA 7:27 Therefore she bowed down to him, and scorned the cruel tyrant [[or scorning the cruel tyrant]], and said in country voice, Son, have mercy on me, that bare thee in womb nine months, and gave milk by three years, and nourished or nursed, and fully brought into this age.
2MA 7:28 I ask, child, that thou behold to heaven and earth, and all things that be in them, and understand, that God made them of nought, and the kind of men.
2MA 7:29 So it shall be done, that thou dread not this tormentor, but be thou made worthy to thy brethren, and receive death, that in that mercy doing I receive thee with thy brethren.
2MA 7:30 When she said yet these things [[or When she yet said these things]], the young man said, Whom abide ye? I obey not to the bidding of the king, but to commandment of the law, that was given to us by Moses.
2MA 7:31 Forsooth thou, that art made finder of all malice against Hebrews, shalt not escape the hand of God.
2MA 7:32 For we suffer these things for our sins;
2MA 7:33 and though our Lord be a little wroth to us, for blaming and chastising, but again he shall be reconciled to his servants.
2MA 7:34 Forsooth thou cursed, and most flagitious, or fullest of evil doings, and stirrings, of all men, do not thou vainly be enhanced, that art enflamed by vain hope against his servants;
2MA 7:35 for thou hast not escaped yet the doom of Almighty God, and beholding all things.
2MA 7:36 For my brethren suffered now a little sorrow, and be made under testament of everlasting life; thou soothly by doom of God shall pay just pains of pride.
2MA 7:37 Soothly I, as my brethren, betake my soul and body for the laws of fathers; and I call God to help [[or in-calling God]], that more ripely he be made helpful to our folk, and that thou acknowledge with torments and beatings, that he is God alone.
2MA 7:38 Forsooth the wrath of Almighty shall fail or shall have an end in me, and in my brethren, which is justly brought in on all our kin. [[For in me and in my brethren, the wrath of Almighty God shall fail, which is justly brought in upon all our kin.]]
2MA 7:39 Then the king was kindled with wrath, and was fierce against him more cruelly above all; and bare unworthily, either heavily, himself scorned.
2MA 7:40 Therefore this was also clean, and died, trusting by all things in the Lord.
2MA 7:41 Forsooth at the last also the mother was wasted, either died, after the sons.
2MA 7:42 Therefore of sacrifices, and over-great cruelties, is enough said.
2MA 8:1 Forsooth Judas Maccabeus, and they that were with him, entered privily into castles; and called together cousins, and friends, and took them that dwelt in Judea [[or in Jewry]], or in keeping of the law of Jews, and led out men to six thousands.
2MA 8:2 And they called the Lord to help, for to behold on the people, that was defouled of all men; for to have mercy on the temple, that was defouled of unpious men;
2MA 8:3 and for to have mercy on destroying of the city, that was anon to be made plain altogether; and for to hear the voice of blood crying to him,
2MA 8:4 and for to have mind on the wickedest deaths of little children innocents, and of blasphemies given to his name; and for to have indignation on these things.
2MA 8:5 And Maccabeus, with the multitude gathered, was made unsufferable to heathen men; for the wrath of the Lord was converted into mercy.
2MA 8:6 And he above-came to castles and cities, unwarned, and burnt them; and occupied covenable places, and gave not few slayings of enemies.
2MA 8:7 Soothly in nights he was most borne to seek out runnings; and fame of his virtue was shed out, either showed, everywhere.
2MA 8:8 Forsooth Philip saw, that the man by little and little came to increase, and that full often things befell to him in prosperity; and he wrote to Ptolemy, duke of Coelesyria and Phoenicia, that he should bear help to the king’s needs.
2MA 8:9 And he swiftly sent Nicanor of Patroclus, of the former, or worthier, friends, and gave to him not less than twenty thousands of armed folks mingled together, for to do away all the kin of Jews; and joined to him Gorgias, a knightly man, and most expert in things of battle.
2MA 8:10 Forsooth Nicanor promised stead-fastly to the king, that he should fill the tribute that was to be given to Romans, two thousands of talents, of the captivity of Jews.
2MA 8:11 And anon he sent to cities of the sea coast, and called together to even-buying of prisoners, or of bondmen, of Jews; and promised, that he shall sell ninety bondmen for a talent [[or one talent]], not beholding to the vengeance that should pursue him of Almighty God.
2MA 8:12 Forsooth when Judas found, he showed to these Jews that were with him, the coming of Nicanor.
2MA 8:13 Of which [[or whom]] some inwardly dreaded, and believed not to the rightwiseness of God, and were turned into flight;
2MA 8:14 others soothly, if any left of them, came, and together besought the Lord, for to deliver them from wicked Nicanor, which had sold them before that he came nigh;
2MA 8:15 and though not for them, but for the testament that was to the fathers of them, and for the calling to help of his holy name and great on them.
2MA 8:16 Forsooth Maccabeus called together seven thousands that were with him, and prayed, that they should not be reconciled to enemies, neither should dread the multitude of enemies wickedly coming against them, but strongly should fight;
2MA 8:17 having before their eyes, the despite that was done in the holy place, unjustly of them, and also the wrong of the city, had in scorning; yet also the ordinances of eld [[or old]] men destroyed.
2MA 8:18 For why he said, They soothly trust in arms altogether and hardiness; forsooth we trust in the Lord Almighty, that may do away with one looking, both them that come against us, and all the world.
2MA 8:19 Forsooth he admonished them also of helps of God, that were done against fathers; and that under Sennacherib an hundred thousand fourscore thousand and five thousand [[or an hundred fourscore and five thousand]] perished;
2MA 8:20 and of the battle that was to them against Galatians, in Babylon; whether if it come to the thing, or truth, when all fellows Macedonians doubted, they six thousands alone slew an hundred thousand and twenty thousands [[or an hundred and twenty thousands]], for help given to them from heaven; and for these things they had full many benefices.
2MA 8:21 By these words they were made steadfast, and ready for to die for laws and country.
2MA 8:22 Therefore he ordained his brethren leaders to each order, Simon, and Joseph, and Jonathan, and made subject to each a thousand and five hundred.
2MA 8:23 Also to this thing, when the holy book was read to them of Ezra, and a token was given of God’s help, he was duke in the first battle array, and joined battle with Nicanor.
2MA 8:24 And for the Almighty was made helper to them, they slew over nine thousand of men; forsooth they constrained the more part of Nicanor’s host, made feeble by wounds, for to flee.
2MA 8:25 Forsooth when the riches [[or the monies]] of them, that came to the buying of them, were taken up, on each side they pursued them; but they turned again, closed altogether by an hour;
2MA 8:26 for why it was before sabbath, for which cause they lasted not pursuing.
2MA 8:27 Forsooth they gathered the arms/ the armours of them, and spoils, and did sabbath, and blessed the Lord, that delivered them in this day, dropping into them beginning of mercy.
2MA 8:28 Forsooth after the sabbath, they parted spoils to the feeble folks, and fatherless, and motherless, and widows; and they with theirs had the residues.
2MA 8:29 When these things were thus done, and commonly of all men beseeching was made, they asked the merciful Lord, for to be reconciled into the end to his servants.
2MA 8:30 And of these that were with Timothy and Bacchides, striving against themselves, they slew over twenty thousand, and they wielded his strengths; and they parted more preys, and made even portion to feeble folks, fatherless, and motherless, and widows, but and to elder men.
2MA 8:31 And when they had gathered the arms/the armours of them, diligently they putted together, or kept, all things in covenable places; forsooth they bare to Jerusalem the residue spoils.
2MA 8:32 And they slew Philarches, that was with Timothy, a man full of great trespasses, that had tormented Jews in many things.
2MA 8:33 And when feasts of [[or for]] victory were done in Jerusalem, they burnt them that had burnt holy gates, that is to say, Callisthenes, when he had flown into an house; for why worthy meed was yielded to them for their unpiousnesses.
2MA 8:34 Forsooth the wickedest Nicanor, that brought a thousand merchants to the selling [[or to buying]] of Jews,
2MA 8:35 was meeked, or made low, by help of the Lord, of them which he guessed none; and when he had put away the clothes of glory, he fled alone by privy places, and came to Antioch, and had highest infelicity, or wretchedness, of the death of his host.
2MA 8:36 And he that promised him to restore tribute to Romans, of the captivity of men of Jerusalem, preached now that Jews had one defender God, and for him, they were unable for to be wounded, for they pursued laws ordained of him.
2MA 9:1 In the same time Antiochus turned again unhonestly or dishonoured from Persia.
2MA 9:2 For he had entered into that city, that is said Persepolis, that is, the chief city of Persia, and he attempted for to rob the temple, and oppress the city; but for the multitude ran together to arms, they were turned into flight; and so it befell, that Antiochus after flight vile-like [[or lowly]], turned again.
2MA 9:3 And when he came about Ecbatana, he knew what things were done against Nicanor and Timothy.
2MA 9:4 Forsooth he was enhanced in wrath, and deemed that he might turn into Jews the wrong of them, that had driven him. And therefore he bade the chariot to be led in haste, doing journey without ceasing; for why heavenly doom drove, or constrained, him, for that he spake so proudly, that he shall come to Jerusalem, and to make it a gathering of sepulchres of Jews.
2MA 9:5 But the Lord God of Israel, that beholdeth all things, smote him with a wound incurable and invisible; for as he ended this same word, an hard sorrow of entrails took him, and bitter torments of inward things.
2MA 9:6 And soothly justly enough, for he that had tormented the entrails of other men, with many and new torments,
2MA 9:7 though he in no manner ceased of his malice. Forsooth over this he was filled with pride, and breathed fire in soul against Jews, and commanding the need for to be hasted, it befell, that he going in fierceness fell down off the chariot, and that the members were travailed with the grievous hurtling altogether of body.
2MA 9:8 And he that seemed to himself for to command also to waves of the sea, and over man’s manner was filled with pride, and for to weigh in balance the heights of hills, was then made low [[or meeked]] to earth, and was borne in a bier, either horse-litter, and witnessed in himself the open virtue of God;
2MA 9:9 so that worms boiled out of the body of the unpious man, and the quick fleshes of him floated out in sorrows. Also with the savour of him, and stinking, his host was grieved;
2MA 9:10 and no man might bear him, for unsuffering of stink, that a little before deemed him for to touch the stars of heaven. [[and he, that a little before deemed him to touch the stars of heaven, no man might bear him, for unsuffering of stink.]]
2MA 9:11 Therefore hereby he was led down from grievous pride, and began for to come to knowing of himself, and was warned by God’s vengeance, for by all moments his sorrows took increases.
2MA 9:12 And when he might not then [[or now]] suffer his stink, thus he said, It is just for to be subject to God, and that a deadly man feel not even things to God.
2MA 9:13 Forsooth the cursed man prayed the Lord of these things, of whom he should not get mercy or should get no mercy.
2MA 9:14 And now he desireth to yield free the city, to which he came hasting, for to draw down it [[or to lead it down]] to earth, and for to make a sepulchre of things borne together.
2MA 9:15 And now he promiseth to make the Jews even to men of Athens, which Jews he said that he should not have worthy, yea, of sepulchre, but to betake to fowls and wild beasts, for to be drawn, and to destroy with little children; [[And the Jews, whom he said himself to having neither soothly worthy of sepulchre, but to betaking to fowls and wild beasts, for to be drawn, and to destroying with little children, now he promiseth to making even to Athenians, or men of Athens;]]
2MA 9:16 also to adorn with best gifts the holy temple, which he robbed before, and to multiply holy vessels, and to giving of his rents costs pertaining to sacrifices;
2MA 9:17 over these things and that he shall be made a Jew, and to walk by each place of the land, and to preach the power of God.
2MA 9:18 But, for sorrows ceased not, the just doom of God had above come on him, he despaired, and wrote to Jews, by manner of beseeching, an epistle, containing these things.
2MA 9:19 To the best citizens, Jews, most health, and welfare, and to be rich, or in prosperity, the king and prince Antiochus.
2MA 9:20 If ye fare well, and your sons, and all things be to you of sentence, that is, befall at your will, we do most thankings.
2MA 9:21 And I am ordained in sickness, and soothly I am mindful benignly of you, and I turned again from places of Persia, and am caught with grievous infirmity, and I led needful for to have care for common profit;
2MA 9:22 and I despair not of myself, but I have much hope to escape [[the]] sick-ness.
2MA 9:23 For I behold that also my father, in what times he led host in higher places, showed, who after him should receive princehood;
2MA 9:24 if that any contrary thing befell, or hard thing were told, these that were in countries, shall know to whom the sum, or charge, of [[all]] things was left, and should not be troubled.
2MA 9:25 To these things I beheld of next, that all the mighty men and neighbours espy times, and abide coming, and I have ordained my son Antiochus king, whom I, running again often into high realms, commended to many of you, and I wrote to him what things be subject.
2MA 9:26 Therefore I pray you, and ask, that ye be mindful of benefices openly and privily, and that each of you keep faith to me, and to my son.
2MA 9:27 For I trust, that he shall do mildly, and manly, or courteously, and pursue my purpose, and be common, or treatable, to you.
2MA 9:28 Therefore the man-queller and blasphemer was smitten worst, and as he had treated others, he died in pilgrimage in mountains, in wretched-ful death.
2MA 9:29 Forsooth Philip, his even-sucker, translated [[or transferred]], or bare over, the body; which dreaded the son of Antiochus, and went to Ptolemy Philometor, into Egypt.
2MA 10:1 Forsooth Maccabeus, and they that were with him, for the Lord defended them, received soothly the temple, and city.
2MA 10:2 Forsooth he destroyed the altars, that aliens made by streets, and also [[the]] temples of washing.
2MA 10:3 And when the temple was purged, they made another altar, and of stones fired, or flints, by fire conceived, they offered sacrifices after two years, and putted incense, and lanterns, and loaves of proposition.
2MA 10:4 And when these things were done, they were cast down to earth, and prayed the Lord, that they should no more fall in[[to]] such evils; but though in anytime they had sinned, that they should be chastised of him more easily, and should not be betaken to barbarians, [[or heathen]], and blasphemous men.
2MA 10:5 Forsooth in what day the temple was defouled of aliens, it befell that in the same day cleansing was made, in the five and twentieth day of the month, that was Kislev.
2MA 10:6 And with gladness in eight days they did by manner of Tabernacles, bethinking that before a little of time they had done the solemn day of Tabernacles, in hills and in dens, by custom of beasts.
2MA 10:7 For which thing they bare before rods, and green branches, and palms, to him that gave prosperity for to cleanse his place.
2MA 10:8 And they deemed with common behest, and with doom, to all the folk of Jews, for to do these feast days in all years.
2MA 10:9 And the ending of life of Antiochus, that was called noble or Epiphanes, had it thus.
2MA 10:10 Now forsooth we shall tell of Eupator, son of unpious Antiochus, what things were done, and abridge, or shortly tell, the evils that were done in battles.
2MA 10:11 For when this Eupator had received the realm, he ordained on needs of the realm a man Lysias, prince of knighthood, of Phoenicia and Coelesyria.
2MA 10:12 For why Ptolemy, that was said Macron, ordained for to hold just things against Jews, and mostly for wickedness that was done against them, and peaceably for to do with them.
2MA 10:13 But for this thing he was accused of friends with Eupator, when he heard often, Thou traitor, for that he had forsaken Cyprus, betaken to him of Philometor, and had translated to Antiochus noble or Antiochus Epiph-anes, also he had gone away from him, with venom he ended the life.
2MA 10:14 Forsooth Gorgias, when he was duke of places, with comelings taken, overcame often Jews in battle.
2MA 10:15 Forsooth Jews that held covenable strengths, received men driven from Jerusalem, and assayed, either attempted, for to fight.
2MA 10:16 These forsooth that were with Maccabeus, prayed the Lord by prayers, that he should be helper to them, and they made assault into strengths of Idumeans.
2MA 10:17 And they were busy by much strength, and wielded places, and slew men running again, and strangled all together, not less than five and twenty thousands.
2MA 10:18 Forsooth when some fled together into two towers full strong, having all apparel to against-fight,
2MA 10:19 Maccabeus left Simon, and Joseph, and again Zacchaeus, and them that were with them, many enough, to the over-coming of them; and he was converted [[or turned again]] to those battles that constrained more.
2MA 10:20 Soothly these that were with Simon, were led by covetousness, and were counselled by money, of some that were in the towers; and when they had taken seventy thousand double drachmas, they let some [[to]] flee out.
2MA 10:21 Forsooth when that thing that was done, was told to Maccabeus, he gathered the princes of people, and he accused, that they had sold brethren for money, for they delivered [[or dismissed]] adversaries of them.
2MA 10:22 Therefore he slew these made traitors, and anon occupied the two towers.
2MA 10:23 Forsooth in doing all things wealsomely, either by prosperity, in arms, and hands, he slew in the two strengths more than twenty thousands.
2MA 10:24 And Timothy, that before was overcome of Jews, called [[or gathered]] together an host of strange multitude, and gathered the multitude of horse-men of Asia, and came with arms, as to take Judea.
2MA 10:25 Forsooth Maccabeus, and they that were with him, when he nighed, besought God, and besprinkled the heads with earth, and before-girded the loins with hair-shirts,
2MA 10:26 and kneeled down at the brink of the altar, that he should be helpful to them, forsooth that to enemies of them he were enemy [[or that he were enemy to the enemies of them]], and were adversary to adversaries, as the law saith.
2MA 10:27 And so after prayer, when they had taken arms, they went forth far from the city, and they were made next to enemies, and sat.
2MA 10:28 Forsooth in the first rising of the sun, both joined battle; these soothly had the Lord promiser of victory and prosperity; for they had [[their own]] hardiness the duke of battle.
2MA 10:29 But when great fight was, five fair man, that is, angels in the likeness of men, on horses with golden bridles, appeared to adversaries from heaven, and gave leading to Jews;
2MA 10:30 of which twain [[or of whom two]] had Maccabeus in the middle, and set about with their armours or arms, and kept him sound, either without harm. Forsooth they casted darts and lightnings against adversaries; of which thing and they were shamed [[or confused]] with blindness, and were [[full]]-filled with perturbation, and fell down.
2MA 10:31 Forsooth there were slain of footmen twenty thousand and five hundred, and horsemen six hundred.
2MA 10:32 Soothly Timothy fled into the stronghold [[or a stronghold]] of Gazara, of which stronghold Chaereas was sovereign.
2MA 10:33 Forsooth Maccabeus, and they that were with him, were glad, and besieged the stronghold by four days.
2MA 10:34 And they that were within, trusted in the secureness of the place, and cursed above manner, and casted, or proudly pronounced, cursed words, that is, blasphemy against God.
2MA 10:35 But when the fifth day shined, twenty young men of these that were with Maccabeus, were kindled in souls for blasphemy, and went manly to the wall, and they went with fierce will, and went up;
2MA 10:36 but and others also ascended [[or going up]], and assailed for to burn towers and gates, and altogether burn the cursers quick. Forsooth by continual two days they wasted the stronghold,
2MA 10:37 and slew Timothy, hiding himself, found in some place; and they slew his brother Chaereas, and Apollophanes.
2MA 10:38 When these things were done, they blessed the Lord in hymns and confessions, which did great things in Israel, and gave them victory.
2MA 11:1 But a little time after, Lysias, the procurator of the king, and kinsman, and sovereign of offices [[or provost of needs]], bare grievously of these things that befell,
2MA 11:2 and gathered fourscore thousands, and all the multitude of horsemen, and came against Jews, and deemed himself to make the city taken a dwelling to heathen men,
2MA 11:3 forsooth to have the temple into winning of money, as other temples of heathen men, and priesthood set to sale by each year;
2MA 11:4 and bethought not on the power of God, but in mind, or understanding, he was made without bridle, and trusted in multitude of footmen, and in thousands of horsemen, and in fourscore elephants.
2MA 11:5 Soothly he went into Judea, and came nigh to Bethsura, that was in a strait place, from Jerusalem in space of five furlongs, and fought against that strength.
2MA 11:6 Soothly when Maccabeus, and they that were with him, knew that strengths were impugned, with weeping and tears they prayed the Lord, and all the company together, for to send a good angel to the health of Israel.
2MA 11:7 And Maccabeus himself took first arms, and admonished others to take together peril with him, and bear help to their brethren.
2MA 11:8 And when they went forth together with ready will from Jerusalem, an horseman, that is, an angel in the likeness of an horseman, or knight, appeared going before them in white clothes, in golden armours or arms, and flourishing a shaft.
2MA 11:9 Then all together blessed the merciful Lord, and waxed strong in souls; and were ready for to pierce not only men, but and most fierce beasts, and iron walls.
2MA 11:10 Therefore they went ready, having an helper of heaven, and the Lord having mercy on them.
2MA 11:11 Soothly by custom of lions, in fierceness they hurled into enemies, and casted down of them eleven thousands [[or eleven thousand]] of footmen, and a thousand and six hundred of horsemen. Soothly they turned all into flight;
2MA 11:12 forsooth many of them wounded, escaped naked, but and Lysias himself foully fleeing escaped.
2MA 11:13 And for he was not witless, he areckoned with himself the making less done against him, and understood that Hebrews be unovercome, and trust to help of Almighty God;
2MA 11:14 and he sent to them, and promised him to consent to all things that be just, and to compel the king for to be made friend.
2MA 11:15 Forsooth Maccabeus granted to the prayers of Lysias, and counselled to profit in all things; and whatever things Maccabeus wrote of Jews to Lysias [[or wrote to Lysias of Jews]], the king granted those things.
2MA 11:16 For why epistles were written to Jews from Lysias, containing this manner. Lysias to the people of Jews, health.
2MA 11:17 John and Absalom, that were sent from you, betook writs, and asked, that I should [[ful]] fill those things that were signified by them.
2MA 11:18 Therefore whatever things might be brought forth to the king, I expounded, and which the thing suffered, that is, was covenable and just, he granted.
2MA 11:19 Therefore if in needs ye [[shall]] keep faith, also from henceforth I shall enforce or endeavour, or attempt for to be cause of good things to you.
2MA 11:20 Of other things soothly I commanded by all words, both to these and to them that be sent of me, for to speak together with you.
2MA 11:21 Fare ye well. In the hundred year and eight and fortieth, in the four and twentieth day of the month Dioscorinthius, that is, in June.
2MA 11:22 Forsooth the epistle of the king contained these things. King Antiochus to Lysias, brother, health.
2MA 11:23 For our father is translated among gods, we will that they that be in our realm do without noise, and give diligence to their things;
2MA 11:24 we have heard that Jews assented not to the father, to be translated to the custom of Greeks, but will [[for to]] hold their ordinance, and that there-fore they ask of us, that their lawful things be granted to them.
2MA 11:25 Therefore we will that also this folk be quiet, and have ordained and deemed, that the temple be restored to them, that they should do by [[or after]] the custom of their greater men.
2MA 11:26 Therefore thou shalt do well, if thou shalt send to them, and shalt give right hand; that, when our will is known, they be in good comfort, and serve to their own profits.
2MA 11:27 Soothly to the Jews the king’s epistle was such. King Antiochus to the senate, or elder men, of Jews, and to other Jews, health.
2MA 11:28 If ye fare well, so it is as we will, but and we [[our]] selves fare well.
2MA 11:29 Menelaus came to us, and said, that ye will go down to yours, that be with us.
2MA 11:30 Therefore to these that go together, we give right hands of secureness till to the thirtieth day of the month Xanthicus, that is, April,
2MA 11:31 that Jews use their meats, and laws, as and before [[or as before]]; and no man of them in any manner suffer dis-ease of these things, that be done by ignorance.
2MA 11:32 Soothly we sent also Menelaus, that shall speak to you.
2MA 11:33 Fare ye well. In the hundred year and eight and fortieth, the fifteenth day of the month Xanthicus,
2MA 11:34 also Romans sent an epistle, having it thus. Quintus Memmius, and Titus Manlius, legates of Romans, to the people of Jews, health.
2MA 11:35 Of these things that Lysias, cousin of the king, hath granted to you, also we granted.
2MA 11:36 Forsooth of which things he deemed to be told again to the king, anon send ye some man; and speak ye among you diligentlier, that we deem as it accordeth unto you. For we go to Antioch,
2MA 11:37 and therefore haste ye for to again-write, that and we know of what will ye be.
2MA 11:38 Fare ye well. In the hundred year and four and fortieth, in the fifteenth day of the month Xanthicus,
2MA 12:1 when these covenants were made, Lysias went to the king; forsooth Jews gave work to earth-tilling.
2MA 12:2 But these that dwelt, or were resident, Timothy, and Apollonius, the son of Gennaeus, but and Jerome, and Demophon proud, and Nicanor, prince of Cyprus, suffered not them for to do in silence and quiet, or rest.
2MA 12:3 Forsooth men of Joppa have done such a felony; they prayed Jews with which they dwelt, for to go up, with wives, and sons, into small boats, which they had made ready, as if none enmities lay privily among them.
2MA 12:4 Therefore by [[or after]] the common doom of the city, and for they accorded, and for cause of peace, had nothing suspect, when they came into the depth, they drenched or drowned two hundred, not less.
2MA 12:5 And as Judas knew this cruelty done against men of his folk, he commanded to men that were with him;
2MA 12:6 and he called to help [[or in-called]] the just doomsman God, and he came against the slayers of brethren, and by night he burnt the haven, he burnt the boats, forsooth he slew by sword them that fled from the fire.
2MA 12:7 And when he had done these things, he went away, as again to turning again, and utterly to destroying [[or to destroy]] all men of Joppa.
2MA 12:8 But when he knew, that also they that were at Jamnia would do in like manner to Jews dwelling with them,
2MA 12:9 also to [[the]] Jamnites he above came by night, and burnt the haven, with ships; so that the light appeared to Jerusalem from two hundred furlongs and forty.
2MA 12:10 When they had gone then from thence by nine furlongs [[or When now they had gone thence by nine furlongs]], and made journey to Timothy, men of Arabia, five thousand men, and horsemen five hundred, joined battle with him.
2MA 12:11 And when strong fight was made, and by help of God it befell easily, or by prosperity, the residue of men of Arabia, that were overcome, asked of Judas the right hands for to be given to them; promising themselves to give pastures, and to profiting in other things.
2MA 12:12 Forsooth Judas deemed verily them profitable in many things, and promised peace; and when they had taken right hands, they departed to their tabernacles.
2MA 12:13 Forsooth he assailed also some city made firm by bridges or buttresses, and about-set with walls, which was inhabited of companies of heathen men mingled, both men and women, to which the name was Caspin.
2MA 12:14 Forsooth these that were within, trusted in the stableness of walls, and in apparel of foods, and did slacklier, stirring Judas with curses, either swearings, and blaspheming, and speaking which things it is not leaveful.
2MA 12:15 Soothly Maccabeus called to help [[or in-called]] the great Prince of the world, which without wethers, that be engines like wethers, and without engines, in the times of Jesus, either Joshua, casted down Jericho; and hurled fiercely to the walls,
2MA 12:16 and took the city by will of the Lord, and did unnumberable slayings; so that the pool of standing water of two furlongs of breadth, seemed [[or was seen]] to flow with blood of slain men.
2MA 12:17 From thence they went seven hundred and fifty furlongs, and came into Charax, to the Jews that be called Toubiani.
2MA 12:18 And soothly they caught not Timothy in those places; and when no journey [[or no need]] was fully done, Timothy turned again, while most firm strength was left in a certain place.
2MA 12:19 Forsooth Dositheus and Sosipater, that were dukes with Maccabeus, slew ten thousand men left of Timothy in the strength.
2MA 12:20 And Maccabeus ordained about him six thousand, and ordained by cohorts, or companies of knights, and went forth against Timothy, having with him an hundred and twenty thousand of footmen, and of horsemen two thousand and five hundred.
2MA 12:21 Forsooth when the coming of Judas was known, Timothy before-sent women, and sons, and other apparel into a strength that is called Carnaim; for it was unable to be overcome, and hard in going-to, for straitnesses of places.
2MA 12:22 And when the first company of Judas appeared, dread was made [[or in-smitten]] to enemies by presence of God, that beholdeth all things; and they were turned into flight, one after another, so that they were cast down more of their own, and were feebled with strokes of their swords.
2MA 12:23 Judas soothly continued greatly, punishing unholy men, and [[he]] casted down of them thirty thousand of men.
2MA 12:24 Timothy soothly himself fell into the parts of Dositheus and Sosipater; and he asked by many prayers, that he were delivered quick; for he had fathers, and mothers, and brethren, of many of Jews, which it should befall for to be deceived by his death.
2MA 12:25 And when he had given faith, that he should restore them by covenant [[or after thing ordained]], they dismissed him unhurt, for health of brethren.
2MA 12:26 Forsooth Judas turned again from Carnaim, after that he had slain five and twenty thousands.
2MA 12:27 After the flight and death of these, he moved the host to Ephron, strong city, in which the multitude of diverse folks dwelt; and strong young men, standing together for walls, strongly fought against; forsooth in this were many engines, and apparels of darts.
2MA 12:28 But when they had called to help the Almighty, that by his power all-breaketh mights of enemies, they took the city, and casted down of them that were within five and twenty thousand.
2MA 12:29 From thence they went to the city of Scythes or Scythopolis, which was far from Jerusalem six hundred furlongs.
2MA 12:30 Forsooth for these Jews that were with Scythopolitans witnessed, that they were had of them benignly, yea, in times of adversity, and that they did mildly with them,
2MA 12:31 they did thankings to them; and also stirred from henceforth for to be benign against their kin, and came to Jerusalem, when the solemn day of weeks nighed.
2MA 12:32 And after Pentecost, they went against Gorgias, sovereign [[or provost]] of Idumea.
2MA 12:33 Soothly he went out with three thousand footmen, and four hundred horsemen;
2MA 12:34 and when they were assembled, it befell that a few of Jews felled down.
2MA 12:35 Forsooth Dositheus, an horsemen of Bacenor, a strong man, held Gorgias; and when he would take him quick, an horseman of Thracia fell on him, and cutted off his shoulder, and so Gorgias flew into Marisa.
2MA 12:36 And when they that were with Gorgias fought longer, and they were made weary, Judas inwardly called the Lord for to be made helper, and duke of battle;
2MA 12:37 and he began with country voice, and with hymns raised cry, and made the knights of Gorgias to flee.
2MA 12:38 Forsooth Judas with the host gathered, came into the city Adullam; and when the seventh day came above, they were cleansed by [[or after]] custom, and did sabbath in the same place.
2MA 12:39 And in the day pursuing, Judas came with his men, for to take away the bodies of men cast down, and for to put with fathers, and mothers, in sepulchres of fathers.
2MA 12:40 Forsooth they found under coats of slain men, of the gifts of idols that were at Jamnia, from which the law forbiddeth Jews; therefore it was made known to all men, that they fell down for this cause.
2MA 12:41 And therefore all blessed the just doom of the Lord, which made privy things known.
2MA 12:42 And so they converted to prayers, and prayed, that that trespass that was done, were betaken to forgetting. And soothly the strongest Judas admonished the people, for to keep them without sin, seeing under eyes, what things were done for sins of them that were cast down.
2MA 12:43 And when collection was made, he sent twelve thousand drachmas of silver to Jerusalem, to be offered a sacrifice for sins of dead men, and bethought well and religiously of again-rising;
2MA 12:44 for if he hoped not, that they that fell should rise again, it was seen superfluous and vain for to pray for dead men;
2MA 12:45 and for he beheld, that they that took sleeping, or death, with piety, had best grace kept. Therefore holy and healthful thinking is, for to pray for dead men, that they be released of sins.
2MA 13:1 In the hundred and nine and fortieth year Judas knew, that Antiochus Eupator came with multitude against Judea;
2MA 13:2 and with him came Lysias, procurator and sovereign of offices [[or provost of needs]], having with him an hundred and ten thousand of footmen, and of horsemen five thousand, and elephants two and twenty, chariots with scythes [[or with sickles]] three hundred.
2MA 13:3 Forsooth and Menelaus joined him to them, and with great deceit besought Antiochus, not for health of the country, but hoping that he should be ordained into princehood.
2MA 13:4 But the King of kings raised the wills of Antiochus against the sinner; and when Lysias showed that he was cause of all evils, he commanded, as custom is to them, him taken, for to be slain in the same place.
2MA 13:5 Soothly in the same place was a tower of fifty cubits, having on each side a gathering of ashes; this was beholding into a ditch.
2MA 13:6 From thence he commanded the sacrileger, or cursed man, for to be cast down into ashes, when all men putted forth him [[or putting him forth]] to the death.
2MA 13:7 And by such law it befell the breaker of law for to die, neither Menelaus for to be given to earth. And forsooth justly enough;
2MA 13:8 for why for he did many trespasses against the altar of God, whose fire and ashes was holy, he was condemned in the death of ashes.
2MA 13:9 But the king without bridle in mind, or understanding, came to show him worse to Jews, than his father.
2MA 13:10 And when these things were known, Judas commanded the people, that by night and day they should call to help the Lord; that as evermore, also now he should help them; which soothly dreaded for to be deprived of law, and country, and [[of]] holy temple;
2MA 13:11 and that he suffered not the people, that a while ago had a little quickened again, for to be subject again to blasphemous nations.
2MA 13:12 Therefore when all men did together that thing, and asked mercy of the Lord with weeping, in fasting/s by all three days, and kneeled [[or cast down]], Judas admonished them for to make them ready.
2MA 13:13 Forsooth he with elder men thought for to go out, before that the king moved host to Judea, and got the city, and to betake the end of the thing to the doom of the Lord.
2MA 13:14 Therefore he gave power of all things to God, Maker of nought of the world, and admonished his to fight strongly, and stand till to the death [[or unto death]], for laws, temple, city, country, and citizens; and he ordained the host about Modin.
2MA 13:15 And when a token was given to his of victory of God, he chose the strongest young men, and by night he assailed the king’s hall in tents, and he slew fourteen thousand men, and the most of elephants, with these that were put above.
2MA 13:16 And they filled the tents of enemies with highest dread and disturbing, and when these things were done easily, [[or wealsomely]], either in prosperity, they went away.
2MA 13:17 Forsooth this was done in the day lighting, for the protection of the Lord helped him.
2MA 13:18 But when the king had taken taste of hardiness of Jews by craft, he assayed [[or attempted]] hardinesses of places;
2MA 13:19 and moved the tents to Bethsura, that was a stronghold of Jews; but he was driven, hurtled, and diminished, or wasted.
2MA 13:20 Forsooth to these that were within, Judas sent needful things.
2MA 13:21 Forsooth Rhodocus, some man of the host of Jews, told out privates to enemies; which was sought, and taken, and imprisoned.
2MA 13:22 Again the king had word to them that were in Bethsura, and gave the right hand, and received, and went away. He joined battle with Judas, and Judas was overcome.
2MA 13:23 Forsooth as he knew that Philip had rebelled at Antioch, which was left on needs, he was astonied in mind, either understanding, and besought Jews, and was subject to them, and swore of all things, of which it was seen just; and he was reconciled, and offered sacrifice, and worshipped the temple, and putted gifts.
2MA 13:24 He embraced, or kissed, Maccabeus, and made him prince and duke from Ptolemais till to Gerrhenians or Gerar.
2MA 13:25 Soothly as he came to Ptolemais, men of Ptolemais bare grievously according of friendship, and had indignation, lest peradventure they would break peace.
2MA 13:26 Then Lysias went up into the doom place, and expounded reason, and ceased the people, and returned again to Antioch; and in this manner the king’s going out and turning again went forth.
2MA 14:1 But after time of three years Judas knew, and they that were with him, that Demetrius son of Seleucus went up to covenable places, with strong multitude, and ships, by the haven of Tripoli,
2MA 14:2 and hath holden countries against Antiochus, and his duke Lysias.
2MA 14:3 Forsooth one Alcimus, that was highest priest, but willfully was defouled in times of mingling together, beheld that in no manner health was to him, neither access, or nighing, [[or coming to]], to the altar,
2MA 14:4 and he came to king Demetrius, in the hundred and fiftieth year, and offered to him a golden crown, and palm, over these things and offered vessels, that were seen to be of the temple; and soothly in that day he was still.
2MA 14:5 Forsooth he got a covenable time of his madness, and he was called of Demetrius to counsel, and was asked with what things and counsels Jews endeavoured, and he answered,
2MA 14:6 They that be said Hasideans of Jews, of which [[or to whom]] Judas Maccabeus is sovereign, nourish battles, and move dissensions, neither suffer the realm for to be quiet.
2MA 14:7 For why and I am defrauded of glory of father and mother, soothly I say, of highest priesthood, and I came hither,
2MA 14:8 first, soothly keeping faith to the king’s profits, the second time, soothly counselling also to citizens, for why by shrewdness of them, all our kin is travailed greatly.
2MA 14:9 But I pray, thou king, when all these things be known, behold to the country, and kin, by [[or after]] thy manliness, or courtesy, showed to all men.
2MA 14:10 For why as long as Judas liveth, it is impossible that peace be to needs.
2MA 14:11 Forsooth when such things were said of him, and other friends, having them enmity, enflamed Demetrius against Judas.
2MA 14:12 Which anon sent Nicanor, sove-reign of elephants, a duke into Judea,
2MA 14:13 with commandments given for to take that Judas quick, for to scatter soothly them that were with him, and for to ordain Alcimus highest priest of the most temple.
2MA 14:14 Then heathen men, that fled Judas from Judea, flock-meal joined them to Nicanor, and guessed the wretchednesses and deaths of Jews prosperities of their things.
2MA 14:15 Therefore when coming of Nicanor was heard, and coming together of nations, Jews besprinkled with earth prayed him, that ordained his people into without end for to keep, and which covereth, or defendeth, his part with open signs.
2MA 14:16 Forsooth for the duke commanded, anon they moved from thence, and came together to the castle Dessau.
2MA 14:17 Simon forsooth, brother of Judas, joined battle with Nicanor, but he was all-broken with sudden coming of adversaries.
2MA 14:18 Nevertheless Nicanor heard the virtue of Judas’ fellows, and greatness of hardiness, which they had for strives of the country, and dreaded for to make doom by blood.
2MA 14:19 Wherefore he before-sent Posidon-ius, and Theodotus, and Mattathias, for to give right hands, and take.
2MA 14:20 And when long counsel was done of these things, and the duke himself had told to the multitude, one sentence was of all, for to grant to friendships.
2MA 14:21 Therefore they ordained a day, in which they should do privily betwixt themselves; and stools, or small seats, were brought forth, and set to each.
2MA 14:22 Forsooth Judas commanded armed men for to be in covenable places, lest peradventure anything of evil should rise suddenly of enemies; and they made a covenable speech together.
2MA 14:23 Forsooth Nicanor dwelt in Jerusalem, and nothing did evil; and he let go flocks of companies, that were gathered.
2MA 14:24 Forsooth he had Judas evermore dearworthy of heart, and was bowed to the man;
2MA 14:25 and prayed him for to wed a wife, and [[to]] engender sons; and he made weddings, did quietly, and they lived commonly, or communally, or together.
2MA 14:26 Alcimus forsooth saw the charity of them together, and accordings, and came to Demetrius, and said, that Nicanor assenteth to alien, either other men’s, things, and hath ordained Judas, traitor of the realm, successor to him.
2MA 14:27 Therefore the king was made sharp, and stirred to wrath with such worst accusings, and wrote to Nicanor, and said, that soothly he bare grievously of according of friendship, and nevertheless commanded for to send Maccabeus bound to Antioch.
2MA 14:28 And when these things were known, Nicanor was astonied, and grievously bare, if he made void those things that were accorded [[or that accorded]], and he was nothing hurt, or harmed, of the man;
2MA 14:29 but for he might not against-stand the king, he kept covenability, in which he should perform the commandment.
2MA 14:30 And Maccabeus saw, that Nicanor did with him most sternly, and gave fiercelier customable coming together, and he understood that this sternness [[or fierceness]] was not of good, and with a few of his gathered, he hid him from Nicanor.
2MA 14:31 And as he knew this thing, that he was strongly before-come, or espied, of the man, he came to the most and holiest temple, and he commanded to the priests offering customable sacrifices, that the man be betaken to him.
2MA 14:32 And when they said with oath, that they knew not, where he was that was sought,
2MA 14:33 he stretched forth the hand to the temple, and swore, If ye shall not betake to me Judas bound, I shall draw down this temple of God into plainness, and dig out the altar, and I shall hallow this temple to Liber, or Bacchus, that is, god of wine, the father.
2MA 14:34 And when he had said these things, he went away. Forsooth the priests held forth hands into heaven, and called him to help that ever is for-fighter of the folk of them, and said these things,
2MA 14:35 Thou, Lord of all creatures [[or Thou, Lord of university, or of all creatures]], that of nothing hast need, wouldest that the temple of thine habitation be made in us.
2MA 14:36 And now, thou Lord, holy of all holy, keep without end this house undefouled, that a little ago was cleansed.
2MA 14:37 Forsooth Razis, one of the elder men of Jerusalem, was accused to Nicanor; and Razis was a man, lover of the city, and well-hearing or well-praising, that for affection, or love, was called father of Jews.
2MA 14:38 This man many times held purpose of continence in Judea [[or in Jewry]], and was appeased for to betake body and soul for perseverance, or lasting.
2MA 14:39 Forsooth Nicanor would show the hatred, that he had against Jews, and sent five hundred knights, for to take him.
2MA 14:40 For he guessed, if he had deceived him, that he should bring in most death to Jews.
2MA 14:41 Forsooth when companies coveted for to fall into his house, and for to break the gate, and for to move to fire, when now he was taken, that is, was nigh the taking, he assailed him-self with sword;
2MA 14:42 choosing to die nobly, rather than to be made subject to sinners, and against his birth for to be led with unworthy wrongs.
2MA 14:43 But when by hasting he had given wound with uncertain stroke, and companies betwixt doors burst in, he ran again hardily to the wall, and casted down himself manly into the companies.
2MA 14:44 And when they gave swiftly place to his fall, he came by the middle of the knoll,
2MA 14:45 and yet while he breathed, he was kindled in heart, and rose. And when his blood with great flowing flowed down, and with most grievous wounds he was wounded, by running he passed the company; and stood on an high stone,
2MA 14:46 and now was made without blood, and embraced his entrails with both hands, and casted forth on the companies, and called to help [[or in-calling]] the lordshipper of life and spirit, that he should yield again these things to him; and thus he was dead from life.
2MA 15:1 Forsooth as Nicanor found that Judas was in the place of Samaria, he thought for to join battle in the day of sabbath with all fierceness.
2MA 15:2 Forsooth when Jews, that pursued him by need, said, Do thou not so fiercely and heathenly, but give thou honour to the day of hallowing, and worship thou him, that beholdeth all things.
2MA 15:3 And he unblessed, asked, If there is a Mighty in heaven, that commanded the day of sabbaths for to be done?
2MA 15:4 And when they answered, There is a quick Lord [[or There is one Lord]], and he is mighty in heaven, that commanded the seventh day for to be done.
2MA 15:5 And he said, And I am mighty on earth, which command arms for to be taken, and needs of the king for to be fulfilled. Nevertheless he got not, for to perform counsel.
2MA 15:6 And soothly Nicanor was enhanced with sovereign or masterful pride, and thought for to ordain a common victory of Judas.
2MA 15:7 Forsooth Maccabeus trusted ever-more with all hope, that help should come to him of the Lord,
2MA 15:8 and he admonished his, that they should not inwardly dread at the coming to of nations, but should have in mind the helps done to them of heaven, and now should hope that the victory should come to them of the Almighty.
2MA 15:9 And he spake to them of the law, and prophets, and admonished of battles which they did before, and ordained, [[or confirmed]], them readier.
2MA 15:10 And so when the souls of them were raised, he showed altogether the falseness of heathen men, and breaking of oaths.
2MA 15:11 Forsooth he armed each of them, not by strengthening of shield and shaft, but with best words and admonishings, and expounded a sweven worthy of believe, by which he gladded all.
2MA 15:12 Soothly the vision was such. Judas saw Onias, that was highest priest, a good man and benign, shamefast in sight, and mild in manners, and fair in speech, and which was exercised in virtues from a child, holding forth the hands for to pray for all the people of Jews.
2MA 15:13 After this thing, that also another man appeared, wonderful in age and glory, and in having of great fairness about him.
2MA 15:14 Forsooth he saw Onias answering for to have said, This is the lover of brethren, and of the people of Israel; this is he, that much prayeth for the people, and [[for]] all the holy city, Jeremy, the prophet of God.
2MA 15:15 Forsooth he saw that Jeremy hath stretched forth the right hand, and hath given a golden sword to Judas, and said,
2MA 15:16 Take thou the holy sword, a gift of God, in which thou shalt cast down the adversaries of my people Israel.
2MA 15:17 Therefore they were admonished with full great words of Judas, of which fierceness might be enhanced, and souls of young men be comforted, and they ordained for to fight, and torment altogether strongly, that virtue should deem of needs, or causes, for that the holy city, and temple were in peril.
2MA 15:18 For why [[or Soothly]] for wives, and sons, and also for brethren, and cousins, was less busyness, but the most and first dread was [[for]] holiness of the temple.
2MA 15:19 But not least busyness had them that were in the city, for these that should assail, or fight, together.
2MA 15:20 And when now all men hoped doom to be, and enemies come [[or came]], and the host was ordained, beasts and horsemen put together in covenable places,
2MA 15:21 Maccabeus beheld the coming of multitude, and diverse apparel of arms, and fierceness of beasts, and he stretched out the hands to heaven, and called to help the Lord doing great wonders, which not by [[or after]] power of arms, but as it pleaseth to him, giveth victory to worthy men.
2MA 15:22 Forsooth he said, calling to help in this manner, Thou Lord, that sentest thine angel under Hezekiah, king of Judea, and hast slain of the tents, either hosts, of Sennacherib, an hundred thousand fourscore and five thousand [[or an hundred fourscore and five thousand]];
2MA 15:23 and now, lordshipper of heavens, send thou thy good angel before us, in dread and trembling of greatness of thine arm,
2MA 15:24 that they dread, that come with blasphemy against thine holy people. And soothly thus he perfectly prayed.
2MA 15:25 Forsooth Nicanor, and they that were with him, moved to with trumps and songs.
2MA 15:26 Judas forsooth, and they that were with him, called God to help by prayers [[of acknowledging]], and went together.
2MA 15:27 Soothly they fighting with hands, but praying God in hearts, casted down five and thirty thousand, not less, and delighted greatly by presence of God.
2MA 15:28 And when they had ceased, and with joy turned again, they knew that Nicanor had fallen, with his armours.
2MA 15:29 Therefore when cry was made, and perturbation was stirred, by country voice they blessed the Lord Almighty.
2MA 15:30 Forsooth Judas, that by all things in body and soul was ready for to die for citizens, bade [[or commanded]], that the head of Nicanor, and hand with the shoulder girded off, should be brought forth to Jerusalem.
2MA 15:31 Whither when he fully came, when men of his lineage were called together, and priests to the altar, he called also them that were in the high tower.
2MA 15:32 And when the head of Nicanor was showed, and the cursed hand, which he holding forth against the holy house of Almighty God greatly gloried,
2MA 15:33 also he commanded the tongue of unpious Nicanor cut off, for to be given to birds gobbet-meal; forsooth he commanded the hand of the mad man for to be hanged up against the temple.
2MA 15:34 Therefore all blessed the Lord of heaven, and said, Blessed be the Lord, that kept his place undefouled.
2MA 15:35 Forsooth he hanged up Nicanor’s head in the highest tower, that it were evident, or known, and open sign of the help of God.
2MA 15:36 Therefore all men, by common counsel, deemed in no manner for to pass this day without solemnity, but for to have solemnity [[or worshipping]] in the thirteenth day of the month Adar, that is said, by voice of Syria, the first day of Mordecai.
2MA 15:37 Therefore when these things were done against Nicanor, and of those times when the city was wielded of Hebrews, also I in these things shall make an end of words.
2MA 15:38 And soothly if well, and as it accordeth to the story, this thing and I will; if else less worthily, it is to forgive [[or to be granted]] to me.
2MA 15:39 Soothly as for to drink evermore wine, either evermore water, it is contrary, but for to use changeable, either now one, now another, is delightable; so to men reading, if the word be evermore sought to each part, it shall not be covenable, or pleasing; therefore here it shall be ended. Here endeth the second book of Maccabees, which is end of the Old Testament, [[or Here endeth the story of Maccabees, the which is the last book of the Old Testament]]; see now the New Testament.
1ES 1:1 And Josiah made pask in Jerusalem to the Lord, and he offered pask the fourteenth day of the month of the first month,
1ES 1:2 ordaining priests by their whiles of days, clothed in stoles, or long clothes, in the temple of the Lord.
1ES 1:3 And he said to the deacons [[or Levites]], the holy servants of Israel, that they should hallow themselves to the Lord, in setting of the holy ark of the Lord in the house, that king Solomon, the son of David, builded;
1ES 1:4 It shall not be to you no more to take it upon shoulders; and now serveth to our Lord, and do ye care of that folk of Israel, of the part after towns, and their lineages,
1ES 1:5 after the writing of David, king of Israel, and after the great worshipful doing of Solomon, his son, in all the temple, and after your little fathers part of princehood of them, that stand in the sight of the brethren of the sons of Israel.
1ES 1:6 Offer ye pask, and maketh ready the sacrifices to your brethren; and do ye after the behest of the Lord, that is given to Moses.
1ES 1:7 And Josiah gave to the folk that was found there, sheep, of lambs, and of kids, and of she-goats, thirty thousand; calves, three thousand.
1ES 1:8 These gifts be given of the king’s own things, after the behest of the Lord to the people, and to priests, into pask; sheep in number two thousand, and calves an hundred.
1ES 1:9 And Jeconiah, and Samaeas, and Nathanael, his brother, and Sabias, and Ochiel, and Joram, gave into pask, five thousand sheep, and five hundred calves.
1ES 1:10 And when these things were nobly done, the priests and deacons [[or Levites]] stood, having therf loaves by lineages.
1ES 1:11 And after the parts of the prince-hood of fathers, they offered to the Lord in the sight of the people, after those things that be written in the book of Moses.
1ES 1:12 And they roasted the pask with fire, as it behooved; and they soddened hosts in seething vessels and in pots, with well-willing.
1ES 1:13 And they brought it to all that there were of the folk; and after these things they made ready to themselves and to priests.
1ES 1:14 Forsooth the priests offered inner fatness [[or tallow]], unto the hour was ended; and deacons prepared [[or Levites made ready]] to themselves, and to their brethren, and to the sons of Aaron.
1ES 1:15 And men sacrificing [[or the sacrificers]] offered their daughters, after the order and the behests of David; and Asaph, and Zechariah, and Eddinus, that was of the king;
1ES 1:16 and the porters by all the gates offered, so that none passed his gate. Forsooth their brethren prepared to them.
1ES 1:17 And so those things, that pertained to the sacrifice of the Lord, be ended. In that day they did pask,
1ES 1:18 and offered hosts upon the sacrifice of the Lord, after the behest of king Josiah.
1ES 1:19 And the sons of Israel, that were found present, did in that time pask, and the feast day of therf loaves by seven days.
1ES 1:20 And there was not solemnized such a pask in Israel, from the times of Samuel, the prophet.
1ES 1:21 And all the kings of Israel hallowed not such a pask, as did Josiah, and the priests, and deacons [[or Levites]], and Jews, and all Israel, that were found in the commemoration, or mind -making, at Jerusalem.
1ES 1:22 In the eighteenth year, Josiah reigning, this pask was hallowed.
1ES 1:23 And the works of Josiah be made right in the sight of the Lord, in full dreading heart;
1ES 1:24 and those things forsooth that were about him be written, in the rather times of them that sinned, and the which were unreligious against the Lord, before, or more than, all heathen folk, and the which sinners sought not the words of the Lord upon Israel.
1ES 1:25 And after all this deed of Josiah, Pharaoh, king of Egypt, went up, coming to cast away in Carchemish upon Euphrates; and Josiah went into meeting to him.
1ES 1:26 And the king of Egypt sent to Josiah, saying, What is to me and to thee, king of Judea?
1ES 1:27 I am not sent of the Lord, upon Euphrates forsooth is my battle; hastily therefore go down.
1ES 1:28 And Josiah was not turned again upon the chariot, but he enforced him to overcome Pharaoh, not taking heed to the word of the prophet, from the mouth of the Lord;
1ES 1:29 but he set to him battle in the field of Megiddo; and princes came down to king Josiah.
1ES 1:30 And then the king said to his children, Moveth me away from the battle; forsooth I am greatly made sick. And anon his children moved him away from the battle array.
1ES 1:31 And he went up upon his secondary chariot; and coming to Jerusalem, he died, and was buried in his father’s sepulchre.
1ES 1:32 And in all Judah they bewailed Josiah, and they that before-set with wives, wailed him unto this day; and this is granted to be done evermore in all the kindred of Israel.
1ES 1:33 These things forsooth be written in the book of stories of kings of Judah, and the glory of Josiah, and his understanding in the law of God, by all deeds of the doing of him; for evenly those were done of him, and the which be not written in the book of kings of Israel and of Judah.
1ES 1:34 And they that were of the kindred took Jeconiah, the son of Josiah, and set him king for Josiah, his father, when he was of three and thirty years.
1ES 1:35 And he reigned upon Israel three months; and then the king of Egypt put him away, that he reigned not in Jerusalem.
1ES 1:36 And he polled the folk of an hundred talents of silver, and of a talent of gold.
1ES 1:37 And the king of Egypt set Jehoiakim, his brother, king of Judea and of Jerusalem;
1ES 1:38 and he bound the master judges of Jehoiakim, and taking Zarius, his brother, he brought him again to or out of Egypt.
1ES 1:39 Jehoiakim was of five and twenty years, when he reigned in the land of Judah and of Jerusalem; and he did evil things in the sight of the Lord.
1ES 1:40 After this forsooth Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, went up, and binding Jehoiakim in a strong bond, brought him into Babylon;
1ES 1:41 and Nebuchadnezzar took and brought the holy vessels of God, and made sacred those in his temple in Babylon.
1ES 1:42 Forsooth of his uncleanness and unreligiosity it is written in the book of the times of kings.
1ES 1:43 And Jehoiachin, his son, reigned for him; when forsooth he was ordained king, he was of eighteen years.
1ES 1:44 Forsooth he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem; and did evil in sight of the Lord.
1ES 1:45 And after a year Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him over into Babylon, together with the sacred vessels of the Lord.
1ES 1:46 And he set Zedekiah king of Judah and of Jerusalem, when he was of one and twenty years. Forsooth he reigned eleven years;
1ES 1:47 and he did evil in sight of the Lord, and was not adread of the words that be said of Jeremy, the prophet, from the mouth of the Lord.
1ES 1:48 And he adjured, or charged by oath, of king Nebuchadnezzar, for-sworn went away, and his noll made hard, he over-passed the lawful things of the Lord God of Israel.
1ES 1:49 And the dukes of the Lord’s people bare them wickedly many things, and they did unpiously over all the wickednesses [[or the unclean-nesses]] of Gentiles; and they defouled the temple of the Lord, that was holy in Jerusalem.
1ES 1:50 And God of their fathers sent by his angel to again-call them, for the which thing he spared to them, and to their tabernacles [[or their tabernacle]].
1ES 1:51 They forsooth scorned in their corners, and that day that the Lord spake, they were bobbing his prophets.
1ES 1:52 The which Lord is stirred to wrath upon his folk, for their irreligiosity. And the kings of Chaldees commanded, and went up,
1ES 1:53 they slew the young men of them with sword, about [[or in the environ of]] the holy temple of them; and they spared not to young man, nor to maiden, nor to old man, and to full waxen man; but also all they be taken into the hands of them;
1ES 1:54 and they took all the sacred vessels of the Lord, and the king’s coffers, and brought those into Babylon.
1ES 1:55 And they burned up the house of the Lord, and destroyed the walls of Jerusalem, and they burned his towers with fire.
1ES 1:56 And they wasted all the worship-ful things, and brought them to nought; and they brought the people left of the sword into Babylon.
1ES 1:57 And they were his thralls, unto the time that Persians reigned, in the fulfilling of the word of the Lord, in the mouth of Jeremy;
1ES 1:58 till that the land would do benignly their sabbaths, he sabbatized all the time of their forsaking, in the applying of seventy years.
1ES 2:1 Reigning Cyrus, king of Persia, in the fulfilling of the word of the Lord, in the mouth of Jeremy,
1ES 2:2 the Lord raised up the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia; and he preached in all his realm altogether by scripture,
1ES 2:3 saying, These things saith Cyrus, king of Persia, The Lord of Israel, the high Lord, hath ordained me king to the world of earths;
1ES 2:4 and he signified to me to build to him an house in Jerusalem, that is in Judah.
1ES 2:5 If there is any man of your kindred, his Lord go up with him into Jerusalem.
1ES 2:6 Therefore how many ever dwell in places about, help they them that dwell [[or that be]] in that place, in gold and silver,
1ES 2:7 in gifts, with horses, and beasts, and with other things, the which after vows be laid up into the house of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem.
1ES 2:8 And the standing princes of lineages of towns of Judah, of the lineage of Benjamin, and priests and deacons [[or Levites]], whom the Lord stirred to wend [[or to go]] up, and to build up the house of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem;
1ES 2:9 and they, that were in the environ, or in compass, of them, should help in all silver and gold of it, and in beasts, and in many vows; and many others, of whom the wit is stirred, help they also.
1ES 2:10 And king Cyrus brought forth the sacred vessels of the Lord, the which Nebuchadnezzar translated or borne over from Jerusalem, and made sacred them in his maumet temple.
1ES 2:11 And Cyrus, king of Persia, bringing them forth, took those to Mithridates, that was upon the treasures of him.
1ES 2:12 Forsooth by him they be taken to Sanabassar, governor of Judea.
1ES 2:13 Of these things forsooth this is the number; silvern hallowed vessels of liquors, two thousand and four hundred; thirty silvern drinking vessels; thirty golden vials; and two thousand and four hundred silvern vials; and a thousand other vessels.
1ES 2:14 Forsooth all the golden and silvern vessels were four thousand and four hundred and eight and sixty.
1ES 2:15 And they be delivered out to Sanabassar, together with them, that were come into Jerusalem of the captivity, or thralldom, of Babylon.
1ES 2:16 Forsooth in the time of Artaxerxes, king of Persia, there wrote to him, of these that dwelled in Judea and in Jerusalem, Belemus, and Mithridates, and Tabellius, and Rathumus, Beelteth-mus, and Semellius, the scribe, and others dwelling in Samaria, and in other places, they wrote this subject letter to king Artaxerxes.
1ES 2:17 Lord, thy children Rathumus, and Semellius, the scribe, and other dooms-men of thy court, of things that fall in Coelesyria and Phoenicia.
1ES 2:18 And now be it known to the lord the king, that Jews, the which went up from you to us, coming into Jerusalem, a city of fleers-away [[or a city again-flown to]], and a full evil city, they build up the ovens of it, and they set the walls, and rear the temple.
1ES 2:19 That if this city and walls were made up [[or full ended]], they shall not suffer to yield tributes, but also they shall against-stand to kings.
1ES 2:20 And for cause that that thing is done about the temple, to have it rightly we have deemed to not despise that same thing,
1ES 2:21 but to make known to the lord [[the]] king, that if it shall be seen pleasing to the king, be it sought in the books of thy fathers;
1ES 2:22 and thou shalt find in remem-brances written of them, and thou shalt know, that that city was again-flown, and kings and cities smiting altogether,
1ES 2:23 and Jews fleeing again, and making battles in it always; for the which cause this city was forsaken [[or is deserted]].
1ES 2:24 Now therefore we make known to the lord [[the]] king, that if this city were built up, and the walls of it were areared, there shall be no coming down to thee into Coelesyria and Phoenicia.
1ES 2:25 Then the king wrote again to Rathumus, that wrote those things that befell, and to Beeltethmus, and to Semellius, the scribe, and to others ordained sovereigns and dwelling in Syria, and in Phoenicia [[or Phenice]], he wrote to them these things that be set under.
1ES 2:26 I have read the letter, that thou sentest to me. Therefore I commanded it to be sought; and it was found, that that city was always withstanding to kings,
1ES 2:27 and men again-fugitive, and making battles in it; and most strong kings have been lordshipping in Jerusalem, and asking tributes of Coelesyria and Phoenicia.
1ES 2:28 Now therefore I command to prevent those men to build up the city, and to look [[or purvey]], that anything be not made hereafter; but that they pass not into full much [[or but go they not forth into more]],
1ES 2:29 since they be of malice, so that grievances be not brought there to kings.
1ES 2:30 Then after these things were rehearsed, that were written of Artaxerxes, the king, Rathumus, and Semellius, the scribe, and they that were with them ordained, enjoining, hieingly came into Jerusalem, with horsemen, and people, and with company; and they began to prevent the builders. And they were voided then from the building of the temple [[in Jerusalem]], unto the second year of the realm of Darius, king of Persia.
1ES 3:1 King Darius made a great supper to all his servants, and to all the master judges of Media and Persia,
1ES 3:2 and to all that weared purple, and to governors, and to counsellors, and to prefects under him, from India unto Ethiopia, to an hundred and seven and twenty provinces.
1ES 3:3 And when they had eaten and drunken, and were fulfilled, they turned again. Then king Darius went up in his little bed-place, and slept, and was awakened.
1ES 3:4 Then those three young men, keepers of the body, the which [[or that]] kept the body of the king, said one to another,
1ES 3:5 Say we each of us a word, that before pass in knowing; and whose ever word seem wiser than of another [[or of the tother]], king Darius shall give to him great gifts,
1ES 3:6 and to be covered with purple, and to drink in gold, and to sleep upon gold; and he shall give him a golden chariot, with the bridle, and a mitre of bis, and a bie about the neck;
1ES 3:7 and he shall sit in the second place from Darius, for his wisdom; and he shall be called Darius’ cousin.
1ES 3:8 Then each of them three writing his word, sealed, and put those under the pillow of king Darius;
1ES 3:9 and said, When the king hath risen, they will take [[or shall give]] to him their things written, and whatever thing the king shall deem of three, and the master judges of Persia, forsooth the word of him is wiser than of the others, to him shall be given the victory, as it is written.
1ES 3:10 One wrote, Wine is strong.
1ES 3:11 Another wrote, The king is stronger.
1ES 3:12 The third wrote, Women be strongest; truth overcometh forsooth over all things.
1ES 3:13 And when the king had risen up, they took their things written [[or their written things]], and gave those to him, and he read.
1ES 3:14 And he sent and called all the master judges of Persia, and of the land Media, and the clothed men in purple, and the rulers of provinces, and prefects;
1ES 3:15 and they set in council, and the writings were read before them.
1ES 3:16 And the king said, Calleth the young men, and they shall show their words. And they were called, and they came in.
1ES 3:17 And Darius said to them, Show ye to us of these things that be written. And the first, that had said of the strength of wine, he began,
1ES 3:18 and said to them, Men! full sur-passingly strong is wine; to all men that drink it, it beareth down the mind;
1ES 3:19 also it maketh the mind vain, both of king and of the fatherless child; also of servant and of free men, of poor and of rich;
1ES 3:20 and it turneth all the mind into secureness, and [[in]] to gladness; and it remembereth not any sorrow and debt;
1ES 3:21 and it maketh all the entrails honest or feel rich; and it remembereth not king, nor master judge; and all things it maketh speak by talents;
1ES 3:22 and when they have drunken, they remember not friendship nor brotherhood, and not long after they take swords;
1ES 3:23 and when they have been drenched of wine, and rise, they have no mind what things they did.
1ES 3:24 O men! whether wine is not surpassingly strong, that thus constrain-eth men to do? And this thing said, he held his peace.
1ES 4:1 And the next follower began to say, that said of the strength of a king,
1ES 4:2 O men! whether men be not surpassingly strong, the which hold land and sea, and all things that be in them?
1ES 4:3 The king forsooth surpasseth above all things, and he hath lordship of them, and they do all things, whatever he will say to them.
1ES 4:4 And if he send them to fighters, they go, and destroy hills, and walls, and towers;
1ES 4:5 they be slain and slay, and they pass not the word of the king; for if they overcome, they bring to the king all things, whatever things they have spoiled evermore, and all other things.
1ES 4:6 And how many ever bear not knighthood, nor fight, but ear the land, again when they shall reap, they bring tributes to the king.
1ES 4:7 And he is one alone; and if he bid to slay, they slay; and if he bid them to forgive, they forgive;
1ES 4:8 and if he say them to smite [[or if he say to smite]], they smite; if he say to outlaw, they outlaw; if he bid them to build, they build;
1ES 4:9 if he bid to throw down, they throw adown; if he bid to plant, they plant;
1ES 4:10 and all folk and virtues obey to him; and over all these things he shall sit, and drink, and sleep.
1ES 4:11 These forsooth keep him about [[or in environ keep him]], and may not go each one, and do their own works, but in his word men obey to him.
1ES 4:12 What manner-wise surpasseth not the king before others, that thus is loosed? And he held his peace.
1ES 4:13 The third, that had said of women, and of truth; this is said Zerubbabel; he began to speak,
1ES 4:14 O men! the king is not most great, neither many other men, nor wine surpasseth before; who is it then that hath lordship of them?
1ES 4:15 Whether not women, that have begotten kings, and all the people, the which kings have lordship both of sea and of land, and of women they be born?
1ES 4:16 And they brought forth them that planted vines, of the which wine is made.
1ES 4:17 And they make the stoles, or long clothes, of all men, and they do glory to men, and men may not be severed from women.
1ES 4:18 If they gather together gold and silver, and all fair thing, and see a woman in goodly array, and in good fairness,
1ES 4:19 they, forsaking all these things, take heed to her, and the mouth opened, they behold her, and they draw more to her than to gold and [[or]] silver, or any precious thing.
1ES 4:20 A man shall forsake his father, that nourished him, and his own land, and to a woman he joineth him together,
1ES 4:21 and with a woman he liveth his life, and neither remembereth father, nor mother, nor the land of his birth.
1ES 4:22 And therefore it behooveth us to know, that women have lordship of us. Whether ye sorrow not?
1ES 4:23 And also a man taketh his sword, and goeth in the way to do thefts, and manslaughters, and to sail over the sea, and over floods;
1ES 4:24 and he seeth a lion, and he goeth in darknesses; and when he hath done his theft, and guiles, and ravens, he bringeth it to his lief.
1ES 4:25 And again a man loveth his wife more than father or mother;
1ES 4:26 and many men be made mad for their wives, and many be made thralls for them;
1ES 4:27 and many perished, and were strangled, and many have sinned for women. [[and many perished, and be strangled, and sinned, for women.]]
1ES 4:28 And now believeth me; forsooth a king is great, and his power, [[or for great is the king in his power]], for all regions, or kingdoms about, be afeared to touch him.
1ES 4:29 I saw neverthelater Apame, the daughter of Bartacus, the wonderful man, the secondary wife of the king, sitting beside the king at the right side;
1ES 4:30 and taking away the diadem from his head, and putting it on herself, and with the palm of her left hand she smote the king.
1ES 4:31 And over these things, the mouth opened, he beheld her, and if she laugh to him, he laughed, and if she were wroth to him, he glosseth, or pleaseth, unto the time that he be reconciled [[in]] to grace.
1ES 4:32 O men! why be not women strongest? Great is the earth, and heaven is high, that do these things.
1ES 4:33 Then the king and the purpled men beheld either into other; and he began to speak of truth.
1ES 4:34 O men! whether women be not strong? Great is the earth, and heaven is high, and the course of the sun is swift; it is turned in the compass of heaven, and again it runneth again into the same place in a day.
1ES 4:35 Whether he is not a great doer, that maketh these things? and truth great, and stronger before all things?
1ES 4:36 All earth calleth inwardly truth, also it blesseth heaven, and all works be moved and dread it; and there is no wicked thing with it.
1ES 4:37 Wicked king, and wicked women, and all the sons of men be wicked, [[or and wicked all the works of them]], and there is not truth in them, and in their wickedness they shall perish;
1ES 4:38 and truth dwelleth, and waxeth into without end, and it liveth, and wieldeth, into worlds of worlds.
1ES 4:39 It is not with truth to out-take or accept persons, and differences; but it doeth those things that be rightful [[or rightwise]], to all unrightwise and evil men; and all men be made benign in his works.
1ES 4:40 And there is not wickedness in his doom, but there is strength, and realm, and power, and majesty of all endurings above time. Blessed be the God of truth!
1ES 4:41 And then he left off in speaking. And all the peoples cried, and said, Great is truth, and it surpasseth before all others.
1ES 4:42 Then the king said to him, Ask, if thou wilt, anything moreover, than there be written, and I shall give to thee, after that thou art found wiser; and next to me thou shalt sit, and thou shalt be called my cousin.
1ES 4:43 Then said he to the king, Be thou mindful of the vow, that thou vowedest, to build up Jerusalem, in the day in which thou took the realm;
1ES 4:44 and to send again all the vessels, that be taken from Jerusalem, the which Cyrus parted or set apart, when he slew Babylon, and would send again those things thither.
1ES 4:45 And thou wouldest build up the temple, that Idumeans burned, for Judea is put out of their terms, or marches, of the Chaldees.
1ES 4:46 And now, lord, this it is that I ask, and that I bid; this is the majesty that I ask of thee, that thou do the vow that thou vowedest to the King of heaven, of thy mouth.
1ES 4:47 Then Darius, the king, rising kissed him, and wrote epistles to all the dispensators, and prefects, and to men clothed in purple, that they should lead him forth, and them that were with him, all wending [[or going]] up to build Jerusalem.
1ES 4:48 And to all the prefects that were in Syria and Phoenicia, and Lebanon, he wrote epistles, that they should draw cedar trees from the hill Lebanon into Jerusalem, that they build up the city with them.
1ES 4:49 And he wrote to all the Jews, that went up from the realm in Judea, for freedom, that any man of power, or master judge, and prefect, should not come over to the gates of them,
1ES 4:50 and each region, that they had hold [[or wielded]], to be free from them; and that Idumeans leave up [[or let go]] the castles of Jews, that they withheld,
1ES 4:51 and to give year by year twenty talents, into making of the temple, unto the time that it be fully builded;
1ES 4:52 and each day to offer hosts upon the place of sacred things, as they be commanded; to offer, by all years, another ten talents;
1ES 4:53 and to all men, that go forth from Babylon, to make the city, as freedom were, both to them, and to the sons of them, and to [[all]] the priests that go before.
1ES 4:54 Forsooth also he wrote the quantity; and he commanded the sacred stoles, or vestments, to be given, in which they should serve;
1ES 4:55 and he wrote wages to be given to the deacons [[or Levites]], unto the day that the house should be fully ended, and Jerusalem made out;
1ES 4:56 and he wrote to all men keeping the city, to give to the builders lots and wages.
1ES 4:57 And he left them all the vessels, that Cyrus had parted or set apart from Babylon; and all things, whatever Cyrus said, he commanded it to be done, and to be sent to Jerusalem.
1ES 4:58 And when that young man had gone forth, raising his face toward Jerusalem, he blessed the King of heaven,
1ES 4:59 and said, Of thee, Lord, is victory, and of thee is wisdom, and clearness, and I am thy servant.
1ES 4:60 Thou art blessed, for thou hast given to me wisdom, and I acknowledge to thee, Lord of our fathers.
1ES 4:61 And he took the epistles, or letters, and went forth into Babylon; and he came, and told to all his brethren, that were in Babylon.
1ES 4:62 And they blessed the God of their fathers, that gave to them forgiveness and refreshing,
1ES 4:63 that they should go up, and build Jerusalem, and the temple, where his name is named in it; and they joyed [[full out]] with musics and with gladness seven days.
1ES 5:1 After these things forsooth there were princes chosen of towns, that they should wend [[or go]] up, by houses, by their lineages, and the wives of them, and the sons and daughters of them, and servants and handmaidens of them, and their beasts.
1ES 5:2 And king Darius sent together with them a thousand horsemen, to the time that they brought them into Jerusalem, with peace, and with musics, and timbrels, and trumps;
1ES 5:3 and all the brethren were playing. And he made them to go up together with them.
1ES 5:4 And these be the names of the men, that went up, by their towns, into lineages, and into part of the princehood of them.
1ES 5:5 Priests; the sons of Phinehas, the sons of Aaron, Joshua, the son of Jozadak, the son of Seraiah, Jehoi-akim, the son of Zerubbabel, son of Salathiel, of the house of David, of the progeny of Phares, of the lineage forsooth of Judah,
1ES 5:6 that spake under Darius, king of Persia, marvellous doing words, in the second year of his realm [[or reign]], in April, the first month.
1ES 5:7 Forsooth these it be, that went up of Judah from the captivity, or thralldom, of the transmigration, whom Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, translated or brought over into Babylon;
1ES 5:8 and each is turned again into Jerusalem, and into all the cities of Judea, each into his own city, that came with Zerubbabel, and with Joshua; Nehemiah, Seraiah, and Resa-iah, Eneneus, Mordecai, Beelsarus, Aspharasus, Reeliah, Rehum, Baanah, one of the princes of them.
1ES 5:9 And the number from the Gentiles of them, from the provosts, or reeves, of them; the sons of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and two; the sons of Saphat, four hundred seventy and two;
1ES 5:10 K the sons of Ares, seven hundred fifty and six;
1ES 5:11 k the sons of Pahath-moab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve;
1ES 5:12 k the sons of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four; the sons of Zathui, nine hundred forty and five; the sons of Corbe, seven hundred and five; the sons of Bani, six hundred forty and eight;
1ES 5:13 k the sons of Bebai, six hundred twenty and three; the sons of Azgad, three thousand two hundred twenty and two;
1ES 5:14 k the sons of Adonikam, six hundred sixty and seven; the sons of Bagoi, two thousand sixty and six; the sons of Adin, four hundred fifty and four;
1ES 5:15 k the sons of Ater the son of Hezekiah, ninety and two; the sons of Ceilan and Azetas, threescore and seven; the sons of Azuran, four hundred thirty and two;
1ES 5:16 k the sons of Ananias, an hundred and one; the sons of Arom, thirty-two; the sons of Bassa, three hundred twenty and three; the sons of Azephurith, an hundred and two or twelve;
1ES 5:17 k the sons of Meterus, three thousand and five; the sons of Bethlomon, an hundred twenty and three;
1ES 5:18 k the sons of Netophah, fifty and five; the sons of Anathoth, an hundred fifty and eight; the sons of Bethsamos, forty and two;
1ES 5:19 k the sons of Kiriathiarius, twenty and five; the sons of Caphira and Beroth, seven hundred forty and three; the sons of Pira, seven hundred;
1ES 5:20 k the sons of Chadias and Ammidoi, four hundred twenty and two; the sons of Cirama and Gabdes, six hundred twenty and one;
1ES 5:21 k the sons of Macalon, an hundred twenty and two; the sons of Betolius, fifty and two; the sons of Nephis, an hundred fifty and six;
1ES 5:22 k the sons of Calamolalus and Onus, seven hundred twenty and five; the sons of Jerechus, two hundred forty and five;
1ES 5:23 k the sons of Annas, three thousand three hundred and thirty.
1ES 5:24 k Priests: the sons of Jeddu, the son of Jeshua, among the sons of Sanasib, nine hundred seventy and two; the sons of Emmeruth, a thousand fifty and two;
1ES 5:25 k the sons of Phassaron, a thousand forty and seven; the sons of Carme, a thousand and seventeen.
1ES 5:26 Deacons [[or Levites]]; the sons of Jessue, and Cadmiel, and Banuas, and Sudias, four and seventy; all the number from the two and twenty year, thirty thousand four hundred and two and sixty; sons, and daughters, and wives, all the numbering, sixty thousand two hundred and two and forty.
1ES 5:27 The sons of priests, that sung in the temple; the sons of Asaph, an hundred and eight and twenty.
1ES 5:28 Ushers forsooth; the sons of Salum, the sons of Jatal, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Dacobi, the sons of Teta, the sons of Sami, all an hundred and nine and thirty.
1ES 5:29 Priests, serving in the temple; sons of Esau, the sons of Asipha, the sons of Tabaoth, the sons of Ceras, the sons of Sud, the sons of Phaleas, the sons of Labana, the sons of Graba,
1ES 5:30 the sons of Acua, the sons of Uta, the sons of Cetab, the sons of Agaba, the sons of Subai, the sons of Anan, the sons of Cathua, the sons of Geddur,
1ES 5:31 the sons of Airus, the sons of Daisan, the sons of Noeba, the sons of Chaseba, the sons of Gazera, the sons of Azia, the sons of Phinees, the sons of Azara, the sons of Bastai, the sons of Asana, the sons of Meani, the sons of Naphisi, the sons of Acub, the sons of Acipha, the sons of Assur, the sons of Pharacim, the sons of Basaloth,
1ES 5:32 the sons of Meeda, the sons of Coutha, the sons of Charea, the sons of Charcus, the sons of Aserer, the sons of Thomoi, the sons of Nasith, the sons of Atipha.
1ES 5:33 Solomon, the sons of him; the sons of Azaphion, the sons of Pharira, the sons of Jeeli, the sons of Lozon, the sons of Israel, the sons of Sapheth,
1ES 5:34 the sons of Hagia, the sons of Pharacareth, the sons of Sabi, the sons of Sarothie, the sons of Masias, the sons of Gar, the sons of Addus, the sons of Suba, the sons of Apherra, the sons of Barodis, the sons of Sabat, the sons of Allom.
1ES 5:35 All these were in holy serving; and the children or servants of Solomon were four hundred fourscore and two.
1ES 5:36 These be the sons that went up to Thermeleth and Thelersas; the princes of them were Charaathalar and Aalar;
1ES 5:37 and they might not tell out their cities, and their progenies, what manner they be; and of Israel, the sons of Ladan, the sons of Ban, the sons of Necodan, six hundred and fifty -two.
1ES 5:38 And of the priests, that used priesthood, and were [[not]] found; the sons of Obdia, the sons of Accoz, the sons of Addus, that took Augia wife, one of the daughters of Barzillai, and they be called by the name of her;
1ES 5:39 and of these is sought the genealogy written [[or the written genealogy]] of the kindred, and they be prevented to use priesthood.
1ES 5:40 And Nehemiah said to them, and Atharias, that they take not part of the holy things, till the time that there arise a taught bishop, into showing and truth.
1ES 5:41 All Israel forsooth was twelve thousand, besides servants and hand-maidens, two and forty thousand three hundred and sixty.
1ES 5:42 The servants of [[them, and]] handmaidens were seven thousand three hundred and seven and thirty; singers and singsters [[or singeresses]], two hundred and five and sixty;
1ES 5:43 camels, four hundred and five and thirty; horses, seven thousand six and thirty; mules, two hundred thousand or two hundred and five and forty; beasts under yoke, five thousand and five hundred and five and twenty.
1ES 5:44 And of those provosts, or reeves, by towns, while they should come into the temple of God, that was in Jerusalem, to be avowed to rear up the temple in his place, after their virtue;
1ES 5:45 and the holy treasury to be given into the temple of works, were eleven thousand bezants, and an hundred priests’ stoles.
1ES 5:46 And there dwelled priests, and deacons [[or Levites]], and others, that were of the people, in Jerusalem, and in the realm [[or region]]; and the holy singers, and ushers, and all Israel, in their regions.
1ES 5:47 While the seventh month yet lasted, and when the sons of Israel were each in his own things, they came together of one accord into the porch, that was before the east gate.
1ES 5:48 And while Jeshua, the son of Josedek, and his brethren, priests, stood, and Zerubbabel, the son of Salathiel, and his brethren, they made ready an altar,
1ES 5:49 that they would offer on it burnt sacrifices, after those things that be written in the book of Moses, the man of God.
1ES 5:50 And there came to them of other nations of the land, and reared the holy treasury in his place, all the folk of the land; and they offered hosts, and burnt sacrifices of the morrowtide to the Lord.
1ES 5:51 And they did the feast of tabernacles, and a solemn day, as it is written in the law, and sacrifices each day, as it behooved.
1ES 5:52 And after these things they ordained offerings, and hosts of sabbaths, and of new moons, and of all solemn days hallowed [[or all hallowed solemn days]].
1ES 5:53 And how many ever vowed to the Lord, from the time of the new moon of the seventh month, they took hosts to offer to God; and the temple of the Lord was not yet builded up [[or yet was not built up]].
1ES 5:54 And they gave money to masons, and to wrights, and drinks [[or and drink]] and meats, with joy.
1ES 5:55 And they gave carts to Sidonians and to Tyrians, that they should carry over to them from Lebanon wood cedar beams, and to make a navy into the haven of Joppa, after the decree that was written to them from Cyrus, king of Persia.
1ES 5:56 And in the second year they came into the temple of God, into Jerusalem; the second month Zerubbabel began, the son of Salathiel, and Jeshua, the son of Josedek, and the brethren of them, and priests, and Levites, and all they that came from the captivity into Jerusalem;
1ES 5:57 and founded the temple of God, in the new moon of the second month of the second year, when they had come into Judea and to Jerusalem;
1ES 5:58 and set deacons [[or Levites]] from the age of twenty years upon the works of the Lord. And Jeshua stood up, his sons, and his brethren, all the deacons [[or Levites]] together casting, and executors, or followers, of the law, and doing works in the house of the Lord.
1ES 5:59 And there stood up priests, having stoles, or long clothes, with trumps, and Levites, the sons of Asaph, having cymbals,
1ES 5:60 together praising the Lord, and blessing him, after the manner of David, king of Israel.
1ES 5:61 And they sung a song to the Lord, for his sweetness and his worship into worlds, or for ever, upon all Israel.
1ES 5:62 And all the people sung with trumps, and cried with great voice, praising together the Lord, in the rearing of the Lord’s house.
1ES 5:63 And there came many of the priests, and of deacons [[or Levites]], and of presidents after towns, to the elders that had seen the rather house, and at the building up of this house, with cry, and with great wailing;
1ES 5:64 and many with trumps, and great joy,
1ES 5:65 so that the people heard not the trumps, for the great wailing of the people. Forsooth there was a company singing worshipfully in trumps, so that it was heard afar.
1ES 5:66 And the enemies heard the lineages of Judah and of Benjamin, and came to know, what was this voice of trumps.
1ES 5:67 And they knew, that they that were of the captivity builded [[or built]] the temple to the Lord God of Israel.
1ES 5:68 And the enemies coming nigh to Zerubbabel, and to Jeshua, and to the reeves of towns, they said to them, We shall build together with you.
1ES 5:69 In like manner forsooth we have heard our Lord, and we have gone together from the days of Azbazareth or Esarhaddon, king of Assyrians, that over-passed from hence [[or that went over hence]].
1ES 5:70 And Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the princes of the towns of Israel said to them, It belongeth not to us and to you together[[or It is not to us and to you]] to build up the house of our God;
1ES 5:71 forsooth we alone shall build the house of our God, after those things, that Cyrus, king of Persia, commanded.
1ES 5:72 The Gentiles forsooth of the land living with them that be in Judea, and rearing up the work of building, and bringing forth both espies and people, they forfended them to build up;
1ES 5:73 and they hindered men, haunting the goings-to, that the building should not be ended in all the time of the life of the king Cyrus; and they drew along the making-up by two years, unto the reign of Darius.
1ES 6:1 Forsooth in the second year of the realm of Darius, Haggai prophesied, and Zechariah, the son of Iddo, a prophet, with Judea and in Jerusalem, in the name of the Lord God of Israel, upon them.
1ES 6:2 Then standing Zerubbabel, the son of Salathiel, and Jeshua, the son of Josedek, they began to build up the house of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem; when there were nigh to them, prophets of the Lord, and helped them.
1ES 6:3 In that time came to them Sisinnes, the under-little-king of Syria and of Phoenicia, and Sathrabuzanes, and his fellows. And they said to them,
1ES 6:4 Who commanded to you, that ye build this house, and this roof, and many other things ye perform? and who be those builders [[or the builders]], that build up these things?
1ES 6:5 And the elder men of Israel had grace of the Lord, when the visitation of them was made upon them that were of the captivity;
1ES 6:6 and they were not hindered to build up, to the time that it were signified to Darius of all these things, and an answer were taken again.
1ES 6:7 This is the ensample of the letter, that Sisinnes, the under-little -king of Syria and of Phoenicia, and Sathra-buzanes, and their fellows, rulers in Syria and in Phoenicia, sent to the king. To king Darius, greetings.
1ES 6:8 All things be they known to the lord the king; forsooth when we came into the region of Judea, and went into Jerusalem, we found men
1ES 6:9 building a great house of God, and a temple of great polished stones, and of precious materials in the walls;
1ES 6:10 and those works busily in making, and to help, and to make welsome in the hands of them, and in all glory, full diligently to be performed.
1ES 6:11 Then we asked the elder men, saying, Who suffered you to build this house, and to build [[or ‘found’]] these works?
1ES 6:12 Therefore forsooth we asked them, that we might make known to thee the men, and the provosts, or reeves; and we asked them the writing of the names of the masters of the work.
1ES 6:13 And they answered to us, saying, We be servants of the Lord, that made both heaven and earth [[or that made heaven and earth]];
1ES 6:14 and this house was builded [[or built]] before these many years of the king of Israel, that was great, and a full strong king, and it was destroyed again[[or full ended]].
1ES 6:15 And for our fathers stirred and sinned against [[the]] God of Israel, he betook them into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, king of Chaldees;
1ES 6:16 and they destroyed and burned up this house, and they brought the people made thrall [[or captive]] into Babylon.
1ES 6:17 In the first year reigning Cyrus, king of Babylon, king Cyrus wrote to build up this house;
1ES 6:18 and those holy golden vessels and silvern, that Nebuchadnezzar had borne away from the house of God, that is in Jerusalem, and had made sacred them in his temple, again king Cyrus brought them forth from the temple that was in Babylon, and they were betaken to Zerubbabel, and to Sanabassar, the under-little-king.
1ES 6:19 And it was commanded to them, that they offer these vessels, and they should lay them up in the temple, that was in Jerusalem, and to build up that temple of God in that place.
1ES 6:20 Then Sanabassar under-laid the foundaments of the house of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem; and from thence unto now is abuilding, and hath taken no full ending.
1ES 6:21 Now then, O king! if it is deemed of thee, that it be perfectly sought [[or be it perfectly sought]] in the king’s libraries of king Cyrus, that be in Babylon;
1ES 6:22 and if it were found in the counsel of king Cyrus, the making of the house of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem, to be begun, and if it shall be showed of the lord our king, write he to us of these things.
1ES 6:23 Then king Darius commanded to be inwardly sought in the libraries; and there was found in Ecbatana, a borough town, that is in the middle region, a place [[or one place]], in the which were written these things.
1ES 6:24 The first year reigning Cyrus king, Cyrus commanded to build up the house of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem, where they burned with continual fire;
1ES 6:25 whose height was made of sixty cubits, and the breadth of sixty cubits, squared with three polished stones, and with solar tree of the same region, and with one new solar; and costs to be given of the house of king Cyrus;
1ES 6:26 and the holy vessels of the house of the Lord, both golden and silvern, that Nebuchadnezzar bare away, that those [[or they]] be put thither into the house, that is in Jerusalem, where they were put.
1ES 6:27 And he commanded Sisinnes, the under-little-king of Syria and Phoenicia, and Sathrabuzanes, and his fellows, to do their business, and they that were in Syria and Phoenicia ordained rulers, that they should abstain them from the same place.
1ES 6:28 And I also commanded to make it up all, and I looked forth, that they help them that be of the captivity of Jews, unto the time that the temple of the house of the Lord be fully ended;
1ES 6:29 and a quantity to be given diligently to these men of the travail of the tributes of Coelesyria and Phoenicia, to the sacrifice of the Lord, to Zerubbabel, the prefect, to bulls, and wethers, and to lambs;
1ES 6:30 also forsooth both wheat, and salt, wine, and oil, busily by all years, as the priests, that be in Jerusalem, ordained to be fulfilled each day, without any delay;
1ES 6:31 also that there be offered offerings of liquors to the highest God, for the king, and for his children, and pray they for the life of them.
1ES 6:32 And be it announced, that whosoever over-pass anything of these things that be written, either despise, be there taken a tree of their own, and be they hanged thereon, and their goods be escheated to the king.
1ES 6:33 Therefore also the Lord, whose name is inwardly called there, outlaw he each king and folk, that stretch out their hand to offend [[or to forfend]], or to evil treat that house of the Lord, that is in Jerusalem.
1ES 6:34 I, king Darius, have made a decree, to be done as most diligently after these things.
1ES 7:1 Then Sisinnes, the under-little-king of Coelesyria and Phoenicia, and Sathrabuzanes, and their fellows, obeyed to these things, that were deemed of king Darius,
1ES 7:2 and stood full diligently into the holy works, working together with the elder men of Jews, princes of Syria.
1ES 7:3 And the holy works be made welsome, as the prophets Haggai and Zechariah prophesied.
1ES 7:4 And they fulfilled all things, after the behest of the Lord God of Israel, and after the counsel of Cyrus, and of Darius, and of Artaxerxes, kings of Persia.
1ES 7:5 And our house is ended or completed, in the three and twentieth day of the month of March, in the sixth year of king Darius.
1ES 7:6 And the sons of Israel, and the priests, and deacons [[or Levites]], and others that were of the captivity, the which be set to, did after those things that be written in the book of Moses.
1ES 7:7 And they offered into the dedication of the temple of the Lord, an hundred bulls, two hundred wethers, four hundred lambs;
1ES 7:8 twelve kids, for the sins of all Israel, after the number of the twelve lineages of Israel.
1ES 7:9 And the priests and deacons [[or Levites]] stood, clothed [[or clad]] with the stoles, by their lineages, upon the works of the Lord God of Israel, after the book of Moses; and there were porters [[or ushers]] by all the gates.
1ES 7:10 And the sons of Israel did that pask, with them that were of the captivity, in the moon of the first month, the fourteenth day, when the priests and deacons [[or Levites]] be hallowed.
1ES 7:11 And all the sons of captivity they be not hallowed together, for all the Levites be hallowed together.
1ES 7:12 And they offered pask to all the sons of captivity, and to their brethren priests, and to themselves.
1ES 7:13 And the sons of Israel, the which were of the captivity, all they that had left from all the cursednesses of Gentiles, or heathen folk, of the earth, ate, and sought the Lord;
1ES 7:14 and they hallowed the feast day of therf loaves, seven days eating in the sight of the Lord;
1ES 7:15 for he converted the counsel of the king of Assyria in them, to comfort the hands of them to the works of the Lord God of Israel.
1ES 8:1 And after this, while Artaxerxes, king of Persia, reigned, there went to Ezra, a man that was the son of Seraiah, son of Azariah, son of Hilkiah, son of Shallum,
1ES 8:2 son of Zadok, son of Ahitub, son of Amariah, son of Azariah, son of Meraioth, son of Zerahiah, son of Uzzi, son of Bukki, son of Abishua, son of Phinehas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron, the first priest.
1ES 8:3 This Ezra went up from Babylon, when he was scribe, and witting in the law of Moses, the which was given of the Lord of Israel, to say it and do it[[or to say and to do]].
1ES 8:4 And the king gave to him glory, that he had found grace in all dignity, and in desire [[or and desire]], in the sight of him.
1ES 8:5 And there went up with him into Jerusalem of the sons of Israel, both priests, and deacons [[or Levites]], and holy singers of the temple, and ushers, and servants of the temple.
1ES 8:6 In the seventh year reigning Artaxerxes, in the fifth month, this is the seventh year of the realm [[or the reign]], going out forsooth from Babylon in the new moon of the fifth month, they came to Jerusalem, after the behests of him, when the prosperity of the way was granted [[or given]] to them of that Lord.
1ES 8:7 In these things forsooth Ezra wielded great discipline, lest he passed anything of those things that were of the law of the Lord, and of the behests, and in teaching all Israel all rightwiseness and doom.
1ES 8:8 They forsooth that write the writings of king Artaxerxes, coming nigh, took writing that, that came from king Artaxerxes to Ezra, the priest, and reader of the law of the Lord, the ensample of the which thing written is set next after [[or is laid under]].
1ES 8:9 King Artaxerxes to Ezra, the priest, and reader of the law of the Lord, sendeth greetings.
1ES 8:10 More benign I deeming also to benefits, commanded to them that desire of the folk of Jews their own things willfully, and of the priests, and of deacons [[or Levites]], that be in my realm, to fellowship with thee into Jerusalem.
1ES 8:11 Then if any covet to go with thee, come they together, and go they forth, as it pleaseth to me, and to my seven friends counsellors;
1ES 8:12 that they visit those things, that be done after Judea and Jerusalem, keeping the law, as thou hast in the law of the Lord;
1ES 8:13 and bear they gifts to the Lord of Israel, whom I knew, and the friends of Jerusalem, and all the gold and the silver [[or all the gold and silver]], that were found in the realm of Babylon, be it borne to the Lord in Jerusalem,
1ES 8:14 with that that is given of those folk in the temple of the Lord, of them that is in Jerusalem; that this gold be gathered and silver [[or that be gathered this gold and silver]], to bulls, and wethers, and to lambs, and kids, and that to these be covenable;
1ES 8:15 that they offer hosts to the Lord, upon the altar of the Lord of them, that is in Jerusalem.
1ES 8:16 And all things whatever thou wilt do with thy brethren, perform it with gold and silver, for thy will, after the behest of the Lord thy God.
1ES 8:17 And the sacred holy vessels, the which were given to thee, to the works of the Lord’s house, thy God, that is in Jerusalem,
1ES 8:18 and other things, whatever will help to the works of the temple of thy God, thou shalt give it of the king’s treasury, when thou wilt make the work with thy brethren, with gold and silver; and perform thou all things after the will of thy Lord.
1ES 8:19 And I, king Artaxerxes, have commanded to [[the]] keepers of the treasures of Syria and of Phoenicia, that whatever things Ezra, the priest, and reader of the law of the Lord, write for, busily be it given to him,
1ES 8:20 unto an hundred talents of silver, also and of gold [[or like manner and of gold]]; and unto an hundred bushels of wheat, and an hundred vessels of wine, and other things, whatever abound, without taxing.
1ES 8:21 All things be done unto the highest God, after the law of God, lest peradventure wrath arise up in the realm of the king, and of his son, and of the sons of him.
1ES 8:22 To you forsooth it was said, that to all the priests, and deacons [[or Levites]], and to holy singers, and servants of the temple, and to scribes of this temple, no tribute, nor any other forfending be borne to them, nor have there any man power to against-cast anything to them.
1ES 8:23 Thou forsooth, Ezra, after the wisdom of God ordain doomsmen and arbitrators, in all Syria and Phoenicia, and teach all that know the law of thy God;
1ES 8:24 that how many ever [[over-]] pass the law, they be busily punished, or by death, or by torment, or also by mulcting, or punishing, of money, or by departing [[or severing]] away.
1ES 8:25 And Ezra, the scribe, said, Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, that gave this will into the heart of the king, to clarify his house, that is in Jerusalem;
1ES 8:26 and hath worshipped me in sight of the king, and of his counsellors, and of his friends, and of his purpled men.
1ES 8:27 And I am made steadfast in inwit, after the helping of the Lord our God; and I gathered of Israel men, that they should go up together with me.
1ES 8:28 And these be the provosts, after their countries, and apportional prince-hoods of them, that with me went up from Babylon, in the realm of Artaxerxes.
1ES 8:29 Of the sons of Phinehas was Gershom; of the sons of Ithamar, Gamael; of the sons of David, Lettus, the son of Sechenias;
1ES 8:30 of the sons of Parosh, Zechariah, and with him be turned again an hundred men and fifty;
1ES 8:31 of the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliaonias, the son of Zaraeas, and with him two hundred men and fifty;
1ES 8:32 of the sons of Zathoe, Sechenias the son of Jezelus, and with him two hundred men and fifty; of the sons of Adin, Obeth the son of Jonathan, and with him two hundred men and fifty;
1ES 8:33 of the sons of Elam, Jessias the son of Gotholias, and with him seventy men;
1ES 8:34 of the sons of Sophotias, Zerahiah the son of Michael, and with him fourscore men;
1ES 8:35 of the sons of Joab, Abadias the son of Jezelus, and with him two hundred men and twelve;
1ES 8:36 of the sons of Bani, Assalimoth the son of Josiphiah, and with him an hundred men and sixty;
1ES 8:37 of the sons of Babi, Zechariah the son of Bebai, and with him two hundred men and eight or twenty -eight men;
1ES 8:38 of the sons of Astath, Johanan the son of Hacatan, and with him an hundred men and ten;
1ES 8:39 of the sons of Adonikam, that be the last, and these be the names of them, Eliphalatus, Jeuel, and Samaeas, and with them seventy men;
1ES 8:40 (This verse is omitted in the original text.)
1ES 8:41 And I gathered them to the flood, that is said Theras and Methati; there we were three days, and I knew them.
1ES 8:42 And of the sons of priests and of Levites I found not there.
1ES 8:43 And I sent to Eleazar, and to Iduel, and Maasmas,
1ES 8:44 and Elnathan, and Samaeas, and Joribus, Nathan, Ennatas, Zechariah, [[and]] Mosollamus, the which were leaders and wise men.
1ES 8:45 And I said to them that they should come to Doldaeus, that was at the place of the treasury.
1ES 8:46 And I sent to them, that they should say to Doldaeus, and his brethren, and to them that were in the treasury, that they should send to us them that should use priesthood in the house of the Lord our God.
1ES 8:47 And they brought to us, after the strong hand of the Lord our God, wise men of the sons of Mahli, son of Levi, son of Israel, Asebebias, and sons, and brethren, that were eighteen;
1ES 8:48 Asebias, and Annunus, and Hosaeas, his brother, of the sons of Chanunaeus; and the sons of them, were twenty men.
1ES 8:49 And of them that served in the temple, the which David and they princes gave [[or the which David gave, and they princes]], to the working to the Levites, to the temple, of men serving, two hundred and twenty. The names of all be signified in scriptures.
1ES 8:50 And I vowed there fasting to young men, in the sight of the Lord, that I should seek of him a good way to us, and to them that were with us, of sons, and beasts, for espies.
1ES 8:51 Forsooth I shamed to ask of the king footmen and horsemen, in fellow-ship of grace, of keeping against our adversaries.
1ES 8:52 Forsooth we said to the king, For the virtue of the Lord shall be with them, that inwardly seek him in all effect.
1ES 8:53 And again we prayed the Lord our God, after these things, whom also we had benignly; and we be made whole to our God.
1ES 8:54 And I set apart of the provosts of the folk, and of the priests of the temple, twelve men, and Sarabias, and Asamias, and ten men with them of their brethren.
1ES 8:55 And I weighed to them silver and gold, and priests’ vessels, of the house of the Lord our God, the which the king had given, and his counsellors, and princes, and all Israel.
1ES 8:56 And when I had peised it, I took an hundred talents of silver and fifty, and silvern vessels of an hundred talents, and of gold an hundred talents,
1ES 8:57 and of golden vessels sevenscore, and twelve brazen vessels of good shining metal, yielding the likeness of gold.
1ES 8:58 And I said to them, Both ye be holy to the Lord, and the vessels be holy, and the gold and the silver is of the avow to the Lord God of our fathers.
1ES 8:59 Wake ye, and keep it, till the time that ye take it of the provosts of the people, and of the priests, and of the deacons [[or Levites]], and of princes of the cities of Israel, and Jerusalem [[or in Jerusalem]], in the privy chamber of the house of our God.
1ES 8:60 And these priests and deacons [[or Levites]], that took gold and silver, and vessels, that were in Jerusalem, they brought those into the temple of the Lord.
1ES 8:61 And we moved forth from the flood of Theras, the twelfth day of the first month, till that we went into Jerusalem.
1ES 8:62 And when the third day was done, the fourth day forsooth the peised gold and silver was betaken into the house of the Lord our God, to Meremoth, the son of Uriah, the priest;
1ES 8:63 and with him was Eleazar, the son of Phinehas; and there were with them Jozabdus, the son of Jeshua, and Moeth, and Sabannus, the son of a deacon [[or Levite]]; all things at number and weight.
1ES 8:64 And the weight of them is written in the same hour.
1ES 8:65 Those forsooth, that came from the captivity, offered sacrifice of the Lord of Israel, twelve bulls for all Israel, fourscore wethers and six,
1ES 8:66 two and seventy lambs, twelve goats for sin, and twelve kine for health; all into the sacrifice of the Lord.
1ES 8:67 And again they read the behests of the king to the king’s dispensers, and to the little under-kings of Coelesyria, and of Phoenicia; and they worshipped the folk and the temple of the Lord.
1ES 8:68 And after these things were ended, they came to me, saying,
1ES 8:69 The kindred of Israel, and the princes, and the priests, and Levites, and alien folks, and nations of the land, have not parted away [[or severed]] their uncleannesses from the Canaanites, and Hittites, and from Perizzites, and Jebusites, and from the Moabites, and Egyptians, and Idumeans;
1ES 8:70 forsooth they were joined to the daughters of them, both they and their sons; and the holy seed was [[or is]] mingled together with the heathen folk of the land; and the provosts and master judges were partners of this wickedness, from the beginning of that realm.
1ES 8:71 And anon as I heard these things, I cut my clothes, and the hallowed [[or the sacred]] coat, and I tore the hairs of mine head, and the beard, and I sat sorrowing, and dreary.
1ES 8:72 And there came to me then as many as ever were moved in the word of the Lord God of Israel, wailing me [[or me wailing]] upon this wickedness; and I sat sorrowful unto the eventide sacrifice.
1ES 8:73 And then I rising from fasting, having my clothes cut, kneeled much [[or much kneeling]], and stretching out mine hands to the Lord,
1ES 8:74 I said, Lord, I am confounded, and I am adread before thy face.
1ES 8:75 Forsooth our sins be multiplied upon our heads, and our wickednesses be enhanced unto heaven;
1ES 8:76 for from the time of our fathers we have been in great sin unto this day.
1ES 8:77 And for our own sins, and for the sins of our fathers we be taken, with our brethren, and with our priests, and with kings of the land, into sword, and captivity, and into prey, with confusion, unto the day that is now.
1ES 8:78 And now how much is it, that the mercy of thee, Lord God, falleth to us; leave thou to us a root and a name, into the place of thine hallowing,
1ES 8:79 to discover our giver of light in the house of the Lord our God, to give to us meat in the time of our servage.
1ES 8:80 And when we served, we were not forsaken of the Lord our God; but he set us in grace, putting to food,
1ES 8:81 and to clarify the temple of the Lord our God, and to build the deserts of Zion, and to give to us stableness in Judea and in Jerusalem.
1ES 8:82 And now, Lord, what say we, having these things? We have over-passed thy behests, the which thou give [[or thou gave]] into the hands of thy children, prophets, that said,
1ES 8:83 Forsooth the land, in which ye have entered, to wield the heritage of it, is a defouled land with the filths of [[the]] heathen men of the land, and the uncleannesses of them have full-filled all it [[or it all]] in his uncleanness.
1ES 8:84 And now therefore ye shall not join your daughters to their sons, and their daughters ye shall not take to yours sons;
1ES 8:85 and ye shall not seek to have peace with them all time, that coming above ye eat the best things of the land, and that ye deal the heritage to your sons, forever.
1ES 8:86 And those things that fall to us, be they all done for our shrewd works, and our great sins.
1ES 8:87 And thou hast given to us such a root, and again we be turned again to over-pass thy lawful things, that the uncleannesses of the heathen folk of this land were mingled.
1ES 8:88 Whether thou shalt not wrath to us, to lose us, for till the root be forsaken, and our seed?
1ES 8:89 Lord God of Israel, thou art soothfast; forsooth the root is forsaken, unto the day that is now.
1ES 8:90 Lo! now we be in thy sight in our wickednesses; forsooth it is not yet to stand before thee in these things.
1ES 8:91 And when Ezra honouring ac-knowledged, weeping, he fell down to the earth before the temple, there be gathered before him a full great multitude, [[or company, or crowd]] of Jerusalem, men, and women, and young men, and young women; forsooth the weeping was great in that multitude.
1ES 8:92 And when Jechonias, the son of Jeelus, of the sons of Israel, had cried, Ezra said, We have sinned against the Lord, for that we have set with us into matrimony heathen women, of the Gentiles of the land.
1ES 8:93 And now whosoever is over all Israel in these things, be there to us an oath of the Lord, to put away all our wives, that be, with their sons, of the heathen folk;
1ES 8:94 as it is deemed to thee of the greater men, after the law of the Lord.
1ES 8:95 Arise now up, and show [[out]]thy will; forsooth to thee abideth this need, and we be with thee; do manly.
1ES 8:96 And Ezra arising up, made the princes of priests, and the deacons [[or Levites]], and all Israel, to swear to do after all these things; and they swore.
1ES 9:1 And Ezra rising up from the fore-porch of the temple, went into the cell of Jehohanan, the son of Eliashib.
1ES 9:2 And he harboured there, tasted no bread, nor drank water, for the wickednesses of the multitude.
1ES 9:3 And there was made a preaching in all Judea and in Jerusalem, to all that were of the captivity gathered in Jerusalem,
1ES 9:4 Whosoever again-cometh not to the second or the third day, after the doom of the elder men sitting, his faculties shall be taken away, and he be deemed alien from the multitude of the captivity.
1ES 9:5 And all, that were of the lineages of Judah and Benjamin, were gathered together, three days in Jerusalem; this is the ninth month, the twentieth day of the month.
1ES 9:6 And all the multitude sat in the floor of the temple, trembling for winter then being.
1ES 9:7 And Ezra rising up, said to Israel, Ye have done wickedly, setting to you into matrimony heathen wives, that ye add to the sins of Israel.
1ES 9:8 And now give ye to the Lord God of our fathers confession, and great worthiness; [[And now giveth shrift, and great doing to the Lord God of our fathers;]]
1ES 9:9 and perform ye his will, and goeth away from the heathen folk of the land, and from heathen wives.
1ES 9:10 And all the multitude cried, and they said with a great voice, We shall do, as thou hast said.
1ES 9:11 But for the multitude is great, and the time is winter, and we may not stand unholpen [[or unhelped]], and this work is not to us of one day, nor of two; much we have sinned in these things;
1ES 9:12 therefore stand the provosts of the multitude, and all that dwell with us, and how many ever have with them heathen wives;
1ES 9:13 and stand they nigh in the time that is taken [[or in the acceptable time of all places]], priests, and doomsmen, till that they lose the wrath of the Lord, of this need.
1ES 9:14 Jonathan forsooth, the son of Azael, and Hezekiah, the son of Thocanus, took after these things, and Mosollamus, and Levi, and Sabbataeus wrought together with them.
1ES 9:15 And all that were of the captivity stood there, after all these things.
1ES 9:16 And Ezra, priest, chose to him men, great princes, of the fathers of them, after the names; and they sat together, in the new moon of the tenth month, to examine this need.
1ES 9:17 And it is determined of the men, that had heathen wives, unto the new moons of the first month.
1ES 9:18 And there be found mingled among of the priests, that had heathen wives;
1ES 9:19 of the sons of Jeshua, the son of Josedek, and of his brethren, Matthelas, and Eleazar, and Joribus, and Joadanus.
1ES 9:20 And they laid their hands, that they should put away their wives, and for to sacrifice a ram, into prayer for their ignorance.
1ES 9:21 And of the sons of Emmer, Ananias, and Zabdaeus, and Manes, and Samaeus, and Jereel, Azarias;
1ES 9:22 and of the sons of Phaesus, Elionas, Massiah, Ishmael, and Nathanael, and Okidelus, and Saloas.
1ES 9:23 And of the deacons [[or Levites]], Jozabadus, and Semis, and Colius, who was called Calitas, and Phathaeus, and Judas, and Jonas.
1ES 9:24 And of the hallowed [[or sacred]] singers, Eliasibus, Bacchurus.
1ES 9:25 And of the ushers, Sallumus or Shallum, and Tolbanes or Telem.
1ES 9:26 And of Israel, of the sons of Phoros, Jermas, and Jeddias, and Melchias, and Maelus, and Eleazar, and Asibias, and Bannaeas.
1ES 9:27 And of the sons of Ela, Matthanias, and Zechariah, Jezrielus, and Jeremoth, and Aedias.
1ES 9:28 And of the sons of Zamoth, Eliadas, and Eliasimus, and Othonias, and Jarimoth, and Sabathus, and Zardaeus.
1ES 9:29 And of the sons of Bebai, Johannes, and Ananias, and Ozabadus, and Emathis.
1ES 9:30 And of the sons of Mani, Olamus, and Mamuchus, and Jedaeus, and Jasubus, and Asaelus, and Jeremoth.
1ES 9:31 And of the sons of Addi, Naathus, and Moossias, and Laccunus, and Naidus, Matthanias, and Sesthel, and Balnuus, and Manasseas.
1ES 9:32 And of the sons of Annas, Elionas, and Asaeas, and Melchias, and Sab-baeus, and Simon Chosamaeus.
1ES 9:33 And of the sons of Asom, Altan-naeus, Mattathias, and Bannaeus, and Eliphalat, and Manasseh, and Shimei.
1ES 9:34 And of the sons of Bani, Jere-miah, and Momdis, and Ismaerus, and Juel, and Mandae, and Paedias, and Anos, Carabasion, and Enasibus, and Mamnitanaemus, and Eliasis, and Bannus, and Eliali, and Somis, and Selemias, and Nathaniah; and of the sons of Ezora, Sessis, and Ezril, and Azael, and Samatus, and Zambris, and Josephus.
1ES 9:35 And of the sons of Nooma, Mazitias, and Zabadaeas, and Edaes, and Juel, Banaeas.
1ES 9:36 All these joined to them heathen wives, and let them go, with their sons.
1ES 9:37 And priests, and deacons [[or Levites]], and they that were of Israel, dwelled in Jerusalem in an one region, the new moon of the seventh month; and the sons of Israel were in their abidings.
1ES 9:38 And all the multitude gathered together in the floor, that is from the east of the hallowed [[or sacred]] gate.
1ES 9:39 And they said to Ezra, bishop and reader, that he should bring forth the law of Moses, that was given of the Lord God of Israel.
1ES 9:40 And Ezra, the bishop, brought forth the law to all the multitude of them, from man unto woman, and to all the priests, to hear the law, in the new moon of the seventh month.
1ES 9:41 And he read in the floor, that is before the holy gate of the temple, from the first light of the day unto even, before men and women; and all they gave wit to the law.
1ES 9:42 And Ezra, the priest, and reader of the law, stood [[up]] upon the treen chair, that was made therefore.
1ES 9:43 And there stood with him Matta-thiah, and Shema, and Ananias, Azar-iah, Uriah, Hezekiah, and Baalsamus, at the right side;
1ES 9:44 and at the left side, Phaldaeus, Mishael, Melchias, Lothasubus, Nabariah, and Zechariah.
1ES 9:45 And Ezra took a book before all the multitude; forsooth he sat before in worship, in the sight of all.
1ES 9:46 And when he had assoiled or absolved upon the law, all they stood upright. And Ezra blessed the Lord God, alder-Highest God of Sabbath, Almighty or all mighty.
1ES 9:47 And all the people answered, Amen. And again they raised up their hands, and falling down unto the earth, they honoured or worshipped the Lord.
1ES 9:48 And Ezra commanded, that these should teach the law, Jeshua, and Annus, and Sarabias, and Jadinus, and Jacubus, and Sabbataeas, and Autaeas, and Maeannas, and Calitas, and Azarias, and Jozabdus, and Anan-ias, and Phiathas, deacons [[or Levites]]. The which taught the law of the Lord, and in the multitude they read the law of the Lord; and each by himself, that understood the lesson, told it before them.
1ES 9:49 And Attharates said to Ezra, the bishop and reader, and to the Levites that taught the multitude, saying,
1ES 9:50 This day is holy to the Lord. And all they wept, when they had heard the law.
1ES 9:51 And Ezra said, Ye therefore, after ye be gone atwain [[or Ye then, gone atwain]], eateth all most fat things, and drinketh all most sweet, and send ye gifts to them that have not;
1ES 9:52 forsooth this day of the Lord is holy [[or holy is this day of the Lord]]; and be ye not sorry, the Lord forsooth shall clarify us.
1ES 9:53 And the deacons [[or Levites]] announced, or showed, openly to all men, saying, This day is holy; will ye not to be sorry.
1ES 9:54 And then all they went away, to eat, and to drink, and to have plenty of meat, and to give gifts to them that have not, whereof to eat plenteously.
1ES 9:55 Greatly forsooth they be enhanced in the words, with the which they be taught. And all they were gathered into Jerusalem, to make solemn the gladness, after the testament of the Lord God of Israel.
PRM 1:1 Lord God Almighty of our fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of their just seed,
PRM 1:2 which madest heaven and earth, with all the adorning of those [[or them]],
PRM 1:3 which hast marked the sea by the word of thy commandment, which hast enclosed altogether the depth, or the deepness, of waters, and hast marked them to thy fearedful and praiseable name,
PRM 1:4 which all men dread, and tremble of the cheer of thy virtue,
PRM 1:5 and the wrath of thy menacing [[or thy threatening]] on sinners is unsuffer-able, either may not be sustained.
PRM 1:6 Soothly the mercy of thy promise is full-great and unsearchable, either may not be comprehended by man’s wit;
PRM 1:7 for thou art the Lord most high over all earth; thou art patient, or long-abiding, and much merciful, and doing penance, or repenting, on the malices of men. Truly, Lord, by thy goodness thou hast promised penance of forgiveness of sins, that is, forgiving sins for repenting of men;
PRM 1:8 and thou, Lord, that art God of just men, hast not set penance to just men, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to them that sinned not against thee.
PRM 1:9 But (thou settest penance unto me, that am a sinner), for I have sinned more than the number is of the gravel of the sea;
PRM 1:10 my wickednesses be multiplied. I am bowed with much bond of iron, and no breathing is to me; for I have stirred thy wrathfulness, and I have done evil before thee, and I have set abominations, and I have multiplied offensions.
PRM 1:11 And now, I bow the knees of mine heart, and beseech goodness of thee, Lord.
PRM 1:12 I have sinned, Lord; I have sinned, and I acknowledge my wicked-ness.
PRM 1:13 I ask, and I pray thee, Lord; forgive thou to me, forgive thou to me; lose thou me not altogether with my wickednesses, neither reserve thou evils to me without end.
PRM 1:14 For, Lord, by thy great mercy thou shalt save me, most unworthy wretch, and I shall praise thee ever in all the days of my life; for all the virtue, that is, all those orders of angels, of heavens praiseth thee, and to thee is glory into worlds of worlds. Amen.
ROM 1:1 Paul, the servant of Jesus Christ, called an apostle, separated [[or set apart]] into the gospel of God,
ROM 1:2 which he had promised before by his prophets in holy scriptures
ROM 1:3 of his Son, which is made to him of the seed of David by [[or after]] the flesh,
ROM 1:4 and he was before-ordained, [[or predestined by grace]], the Son of God in virtue, by the Spirit of hallowing of the again-rising of dead men, of Jesus Christ our Lord,
ROM 1:5 by whom we have received grace and the office of apostle [[or apostle-hood]], to obey to the faith in all folks, for his name,
ROM 1:6 among which ye be also called of Jesus Christ,
ROM 1:7 to all that be at Rome, darlings [[or the beloved]] of God, and called holy, grace [[be]] to you, and peace of God our Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
ROM 1:8 First I do thankings to my God, by Jesus Christ, for all you, for your faith is showed in all the world.
ROM 1:9 For God is a witness to me, to whom I serve in my spirit, in the gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make mind of you ever[[more]] in my prayers,
ROM 1:10 and beseech [[or praying]], if in any manner sometime I have a speedy way in the will of God to come to you.
ROM 1:11 For I desire to see you, to impart somewhat to you of spiritual grace [[or that I give to you something of spiritual grace]], that ye be confirmed,
ROM 1:12 that is, to be comforted together in you, by [[that]] faith that is both yours and mine together.
ROM 1:13 And, brethren, I will not, that ye not know, that oft I purposed to come to you, and I am hindered till this time, that I have some fruit in you, as in other folks.
ROM 1:14 To Greeks and to barbarians, to wise men and to unwise men, I am debtor,
ROM 1:15 so that that is in me is ready to preach the gospel [[or to evangelize]] also to you that be at Rome.
ROM 1:16 For I shame not the gospel, for it is the virtue of God into health, to each man that believeth, to the Jew first, and to the Greek.
ROM 1:17 For the rightwiseness of God is showed in it, of faith into faith, as it is written, For a just man liveth of faith.
ROM 1:18 For the wrath of God is showed from heaven on all unpiety and wickedness [[or unrightwiseness]] of those men, that withhold [[or hold aback]] the truth of God in unrightwiseness.
ROM 1:19 For that thing of God that is known, is showed [[or is made open]] to them, for God hath showed to them.
ROM 1:20 For the invisible things of him, that be understood, be beheld of the creature of the world, by those things that be made, yea, and the everlasting virtue of him, and the Godhead, so that they may not be excused [[or they be unexcusable]].
ROM 1:21 For when they had known God, they glorified him not as God, neither did thankings; but they vanished in their thoughts, and the unwise heart of them was darked [[or made dark]].
ROM 1:22 For they saying that themselves were wise, they were made fools.
ROM 1:23 And they exchanged the glory of uncorruptible God into the likeness of an image of a deadly [[or a corruptible]] man, and of birds, and of four-footed beasts, and of serpents.
ROM 1:24 For which thing God betook them into the desires of their heart, into uncleanness, that they punish with wrongs their bodies in themselves.
ROM 1:25 The which [[men]] changed the truth of God into leasing, and praised and served a creature rather than the Creator, that is blessed into worlds of worlds [[or into without end]]. Amen.
ROM 1:26 Therefore God betook them into passions of shame [[or of evil fame]]. For the women of them changed the natural use into that use that is against kind.
ROM 1:27 Also the men forsook the kindly use of women, and burned in their desires together, and men into men wrought filthhood, and received into themselves the meed that behooved of their error.
ROM 1:28 And as they proved that they had not God in knowing, God betook them into a reprovable wit, that they do those things that be not covenable;
ROM 1:29 that they be full-filled with all wickedness, malice, fornication, covet-ousness, waywardness, full of envy, manslayings, strife, guile, evil will,
ROM 1:30 privy backbiters, detractors, hate-ful to God, debaters [[or despisers]], proud, and high over-measure, finders of evil things, not obedient to father and mother,
ROM 1:31 unwise, unmannerly, without love [[or without affection]], without bond of peace, without mercy.
ROM 1:32 The which when they had known the rightwiseness of God, understood not, that they that do such things be worthy the death, not only they that do those things, but also they that consent to the doers.
ROM 2:1 Therefore thou art unexcusable, each man that deemest, for in what thing thou deemest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou doest the same things which thou deemest.
ROM 2:2 And we know, that the doom of God is after truth against them, that do such things.
ROM 2:3 But guessest thou, man, that deemest them that do such things, and thou doest those things, that thou shalt escape the doom of God?
ROM 2:4 Whether thou despisest the riches of his goodness, and the patience, and the long abiding? Knowest thou not, that the benignity, [[or good will]], of God leadeth thee to repenting [[or to penance]]?
ROM 2:5 But after thine hardness and unrepentant heart, thou treasurest to thee wrath in[[to]] the day of wrath, and of showing of the rightful doom of God,
ROM 2:6 that shall yield to each man after his works;
ROM 2:7 soothly to them that be by patience of good work, glory, and honour, and uncorruption, to them that seek everlasting life;
ROM 2:8 but to them that be of strife, and that assent not to truth, but believe to wickedness, wrath and indignation,
ROM 2:9 tribulation and anguish, into each soul of man that worketh evil, to the Jew first, and to the Greek;
ROM 2:10 but glory, and honour, and peace, to each man that worketh good thing, to the Jew first, and to the Greek.
ROM 2:11 For acception of persons, [[that is, to put one before another without desert]], is not with God.
ROM 2:12 For whoever have sinned without the law, shall perish without the law; and whoever have sinned in the law, they shall be deemed by the law.
ROM 2:13 For the hearers of the law be not just with God, but the doers of the law shall be made just.
ROM 2:14 For when heathen men that have not law, do kindly those things that be of the law, they not having such manner [[of]] law, be law to themselves,
ROM 2:15 that show the work of the law written in their hearts. For the conscience of them yieldeth to them a witnessing betwixt themselves of thoughts that be accusing or defending,
ROM 2:16 in the day when God shall deem the privy things of men after my gospel, by Jesus Christ.
ROM 2:17 But if thou art named a Jew, and restest in the law, and hast glory in God,
ROM 2:18 and hast known his will, and thou learned by the law approvest [[or hast proved]] the more profitable things,
ROM 2:19 and trustest thyself to be a leader of blind men, the light of them that be in darknesses,
ROM 2:20 a teacher of unwise men, a master of young children, that hast the form of knowing [[or of science]], and of truth in the law;
ROM 2:21 what then teachest thou another, and teachest not thyself? Thou that preachest that me/that men shall not steal, stealest? [[or Thou that preachest to not steal, stealest?]]
ROM 2:22 Thou that teachest that me/that men shall not do lechery, doest lechery? [[or Thou that sayest to not do lechery, doest lechery?]] Thou that loathest maumets [[or idols]], doest sacrilege?
ROM 2:23 Thou that hast glory in the law, unworshippest God by breaking of the law?
ROM 2:24 For the name of God is blasphemed by you among heathen men, as [[it]] is written.
ROM 2:25 For circumcision profiteth, if thou keep the law; but if thou be a trespasser against the law, thy circumcision is made prepuce.
ROM 2:26 Therefore if prepuce keep the rightwiseness of the law, whether his prepuce shall not be areckoned into circumcision?
ROM 2:27 And the prepuce of kind that fulfilleth the law, shall deem thee, that by letter and circumcision art a trespasser against the law.
ROM 2:28 For he that is in open is not a Jew, neither it is [[the]] circumcision that is openly in the flesh;
ROM 2:29 but he that is a Jew in hid, and the circumcision of heart, in spirit, not by [[or in]] the letter, whose praising is not of men, but of God.
ROM 3:1 What then is more to a Jew, or what profit of circumcision?
ROM 3:2 Much by all wise [[or by all manner]]; first, for the speakings of God were betaken to them.
ROM 3:3 And what if some of them believed not? Whether the unbelief of them hath voided the faith of God?
ROM 3:4 God forbid. For God is soothfast, [[or true]], but each man a liar; as it is written, That thou be justified in thy words, and overcome, when thou art deemed.
ROM 3:5 But if our wickedness commend the rightwiseness of God, what shall we say? Whether God is wicked, that bringeth in wrath? After man I say.
ROM 3:6 God forbid. Else how shall God deem this world?
ROM 3:7 For if the truth of God hath abounded in my leasing, into the glory of him, what yet am I deemed as a sinner?
ROM 3:8 And not as we be blasphemed, and as some say that we say, Do we evil things, that good things come. Whose damnation is just.
ROM 3:9 What then? Surpass we them? Nay; for we have showed by skill, that all both Jews and Greeks be under sin [[or the Jews and Greeks all to be under sin]],
ROM 3:10 as it is written, For there is no man just;
ROM 3:11 there is no man understanding, neither seeking God.
ROM 3:12 All bowed away, together they be made unprofitable; there is none that doeth good thing, there is none till to one.
ROM 3:13 The throat of them is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they did guilefully, [[or treacherously]]; the venom of snakes is under their lips.
ROM 3:14 The mouth of whom is full of cursing and bitterness;
ROM 3:15 the feet of them be swift to shed blood.
ROM 3:16 Sorrow and cursedness be in the ways of them,
ROM 3:17 and they knew not the way of peace;
ROM 3:18 the dread of God is not before their eyes.
ROM 3:19 And we know, that whatever things the law speaketh, it speaketh to them that be in the law, that each mouth be stopped, and each world be made subject to God.
ROM 3:20 For of the works of the law each flesh shall not be justified before him; for by the law there is knowing of sin.
ROM 3:21 But now without the law the rightwiseness of God is showed, that is witnessed of the law and the prophets.
ROM 3:22 And the rightwiseness of God is by the faith of Jesus Christ into all men and on all men that believe in him; for there is no parting [[or distinction]].
ROM 3:23 For all men sinned, and have need to the glory of God;
ROM 3:24 and be justified freely by his grace, by the again-buying [[or the redemption]] that is in Christ.
ROM 3:25 Whom God ordained forgiver [[or purposed an helper]], by faith in his blood, to the showing of his right-wiseness, for [[the]] remission of before-going sins, in the bearing up of God,
ROM 3:26 to the showing of his rightwise-ness in this time, that he be just, and justifying him that is of the faith of Jesus Christ.
ROM 3:27 Where then is thy glorying? It is excluded. By what law? Of deeds doing? Nay, but by the law of faith.
ROM 3:28 For we deem a man to be justified by faith, without works of the law.
ROM 3:29 Whether of the Jews is God only? Whether he is not also of heathen men? Yes, and of heathen men.
ROM 3:30 For there is one God, that justifieth circumcision by faith, and prepuce by faith.
ROM 3:31 Destroy we therefore the law by faith? God forbid; but we stablish the law.
ROM 4:1 What then shall we say, that Abraham, our father after the flesh, found?
ROM 4:2 For if Abraham is justified of works of the law, he hath glory, but not with God.
ROM 4:3 For what saith the scripture? Abraham believed to God, and it was areckoned to him to rightwiseness.
ROM 4:4 And to him that worketh, meed is not areckoned by grace, but by debt.
ROM 4:5 Soothly to him that worketh not, but believeth into him that justifieth a wicked [[or an unpious]] man, his faith is areckoned to rightwiseness, after the purpose of God’s grace.
ROM 4:6 As David saith the blessedness of a man, whom God accepteth, he giveth to him rightwiseness without works of the law,
ROM 4:7 Blessed be they, whose wicked-nesses be forgiven, and whose sins be hid [[or be covered]].
ROM 4:8 Blessed is that man, to whom God areckoned not sin.
ROM 4:9 Then whether dwelleth this blessedness only in circumcision, or also in prepuce? For we say, that the faith was areckoned to Abraham to rightwiseness.
ROM 4:10 How then was it areckoned? in circumcision, or in prepuce? Not in circumcision, but in prepuce.
ROM 4:11 And he took a sign of circumcision, a token [[or a marking]] of rightwiseness of the faith which is in prepuce, that he be father of all men believing by prepuce, that it be areckoned also to them to rightwise-ness;
ROM 4:12 and that he be father of circumcision, not only to them that be of circumcision, but also to them that pursue the steps of the faith, which faith is in prepuce of our father Abraham, [[or but and to them that pursue the steps of the faith of our father Abraham, that is in prepuce]].
ROM 4:13 For not by the law is [[the]] promise to Abraham, or to his seed, that he should be [[the]] heir of the world, but by the rightwiseness of faith.
ROM 4:14 For if they that be of the law, be heirs, faith is destroyed, promise is done away.
ROM 4:15 For the law worketh wrath; for where is no law, there is no trespass, neither is trespassing [[or prevarication]].
ROM 4:16 Therefore rightwiseness is of faith, that by grace promise be stable [[or be steadfast]] to each seed, not to that seed only that is of the law, but to that that is of the faith of Abraham, which is father of us all.
ROM 4:17 As it is written, For I have set thee father of many folks, before God to whom thou hast believed. The which God quickeneth dead men [[or The which quickeneth the dead]], and calleth those things that be not, as those that be.
ROM 4:18 [[The]] Which Abraham against hope believed into hope, that he should be made father of many folks, as it was said to him, Thus shall thy seed be, as the stars of heaven, and as the gravel [[or sand]] that is in the brink of the sea.
ROM 4:19 And he was not made unsteadfast in the belief, neither he beheld his body then nigh dead, when he was almost of an hundred years, nor the womb of Sarah nigh dead.
ROM 4:20 Also in the promise of God he doubted not with untrust; but he was comforted in belief, giving glory to God,
ROM 4:21 witting most fully that whatever things God hath promised, he is mighty also to do.
ROM 4:22 Therefore it was areckoned to him to rightwiseness.
ROM 4:23 And it is not written only for him, that it was areckoned to him to rightwiseness,
ROM 4:24 but also for us, to whom it shall be areckoned, that believe in him that raised our Lord Jesus Christ from death.
ROM 4:25 Which was betaken for our sins, and rose again for our justifying.
ROM 5:1 Therefore we, justified of faith, have we peace at God by our Lord Jesus Christ.
ROM 5:2 By whom we have nigh going to [[or access]], by faith into this grace, in which we stand, and have glory in the hope of the glory of God’s children.
ROM 5:3 And not this only, but also we glory in tribulations, witting that tribulation worketh patience,
ROM 5:4 and patience proving, and proving hope.
ROM 5:5 And hope confoundeth not, for the charity of God is spread abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, that is given to us.
ROM 5:6 And while that we were sick after the time, what died Christ for wicked men?
ROM 5:7 For scarcely dieth any man for the just man; and yet for a good man peradventure some man dare die.
ROM 5:8 But God commendeth his charity in us; for if when we were yet sinners, after the time Christ was dead for us,
ROM 5:9 then much more now we justified in his blood, shall be safe from wrath by him.
ROM 5:10 For if when we were enemies, we be reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more we reconciled shall be safe in the life of him.
ROM 5:11 And not only this, but also we glory in God, by our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received now reconciling.
ROM 5:12 Therefore as by one man sin entered into this world, and by sin death, and so death passed forth into all men, in which man all men sinned.
ROM 5:13 For unto the law sin was in the world; but sin was not reckoned, when [[the]] law was not.
ROM 5:14 But death reigned from Adam unto Moses, also into them that sinned not in likeness of the trespassing of Adam, the which is likeness of Christ to coming [[or to come]].
ROM 5:15 But not as [[the]] guilt [[or the trespass]], so the gift; for if through the guilt [[or the trespass]] of one many be dead, much more the grace of God and the gift in the grace of one man Jesus Christ hath abounded into many men.
ROM 5:16 And not as by one sin, so by the gift; for the doom, of one into condemnation, but the grace of many guilts [[or trespassings]] into justification.
ROM 5:17 For if in the guilt of one death reigned through one, much more men that take plenty of grace, and of giving, and of rightwiseness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ.
ROM 5:18 Therefore as by the guilt of one into all men into condemnation, so by the rightwiseness of one into all men into justifying of life.
ROM 5:19 For as by unobedience of one man many be made sinners, so by the obedience of one many shall be [[ordained]] just.
ROM 5:20 And the law entered, that guilt should be plenteous; but where guilt was plenteous, grace was more plenteous [[or abounded]].
ROM 5:21 That as sin reigned into death, so grace reign by rightwiseness into ever-lasting life, by Jesus Christ our Lord.
ROM 6:1 Therefore what shall we say? Shall we dwell in sin, that grace be plenteous?
ROM 6:2 God forbid. For how shall we that be dead to sin, live yet therein?
ROM 6:3 Whether, brethren, ye know not, that whichever we be baptized in Christ Jesus, we be baptized in his death?
ROM 6:4 For we be together buried with him by baptism into death; that as Christ arose from death by the glory of the Father, so walk we in a newness of life.
ROM 6:5 For if we planted together be made to the likeness of his death, also we shall be of the likeness of his rising again;
ROM 6:6 witting this thing, that our old man is crucified together, that the body of sin be destroyed, that we serve no more to sin.
ROM 6:7 For he that is dead [[to sin]], is justified from sin.
ROM 6:8 And if we be dead with Christ, we believe that also we shall live together with him;
ROM 6:9 witting that Christ, rising again from death, now dieth not, death shall no more have lordship on him.
ROM 6:10 For that he was dead to sin, he was dead once; but that he liveth, he liveth to God.
ROM 6:11 So ye deem yourselves to be dead to sin, but living to God in Jesus Christ our Lord.
ROM 6:12 Therefore reign not sin in your deadly body, that ye obey to his covetings.
ROM 6:13 Neither give ye your members arms of wickedness to sin, but give ye yourselves to God, as they that live of dead men, and your members arms of rightwiseness to God.
ROM 6:14 For sin shall not have lordship over you; for ye be not under the law, but under grace.
ROM 6:15 What therefore? Shall we do sin, for we be not under the law, but under grace? God forbid.
ROM 6:16 Know ye not, that to whom ye give you servants to obey to, ye be servants of that thing, to which ye have obeyed, either of sin to death, either of obedience to rightwiseness?
ROM 6:17 But I thank God, that ye were servants of sin; but ye have obeyed of heart into that form of teaching, in which ye be betaken.
ROM 6:18 And ye delivered from sin, be made servants of rightwiseness.
ROM 6:19 I say that thing that is of man, for the unsteadfastness, [[or the infirmity, or unstableness]], of your flesh. But as ye have given your members to serve to uncleanness, and to wickedness into wickedness, so now give ye your members to serve to rightwiseness into holiness.
ROM 6:20 For when ye were servants of sin, ye were free of rightwiseness.
ROM 6:21 Therefore what fruit had ye then in those things, in which ye shame now? For the end of them is death.
ROM 6:22 But now ye delivered from sin, and made servants to God, have your fruit into holiness, and the end everlasting life.
ROM 6:23 For the wages of sin is death; the grace of God is everlasting life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
ROM 7:1 Brethren, whether ye know not; for I speak to men that know the law; for the law hath lordship in a man, as long time as he liveth?
ROM 7:2 For that woman that is under an husband, is bound to the law, while the husband liveth; but if her husband is dead, she is delivered [[or is unbound]] from the law of the husband.
ROM 7:3 Therefore she shall be called adulteress, if she be with another man, while the husband liveth; but if her husband is dead, she is delivered from the law of the husband, that she be not adulteress, if she be with another man.
ROM 7:4 And so, my brethren, ye be made dead to the law by [[or through]] the body of Christ, that ye be of another, that rose again from death, that ye bear fruit to God.
ROM 7:5 For when we were in flesh, passions of sins, that were by the law, wrought in our members, to bear fruit to death.
ROM 7:6 But now we be unbound from the law of death, in which we were held, so that we serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of letter.
ROM 7:7 What therefore shall we say? The law is sin? God forbid. But I knew not sin, but by [[the]] law; for I knew not that coveting was sin, but for the law said, Thou shalt not covet.
ROM 7:8 And through occasion taken, sin by the commandment hath wrought in me all covetousness; for without the law, sin was dead.
ROM 7:9 And I lived without the law sometime; but when the commandment was come [[or had come]], sin lived again. But I was dead,
ROM 7:10 and this commandment that was to life, was found to me, to be to death.
ROM 7:11 For sin, through occasion taken by the commandment, deceived me, and by that it slew me.
ROM 7:12 Therefore the law is holy, and the commandment is holy, and just, and good.
ROM 7:13 Is then that thing that is good, made death to me? God forbid. But sin, that it seem sin, through good thing wrought death to me, that me or that men sin over-manner through the commandment.
ROM 7:14 And we know, that the law is spiritual; but I am fleshly, sold under sin.
ROM 7:15 For I understand not that that I work; for I do not the good thing that I will, but I do that evil thing that I hate.
ROM 7:16 And if I do that thing that I will not, I consent to the law, that it is good.
ROM 7:17 But now I work not it now, but the sin that dwelleth in me.
ROM 7:18 But I know, that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good; for will lieth to me, but I find not to perform good thing.
ROM 7:19 For I do not that good thing that I will, but I do that evil thing that I will not.
ROM 7:20 And if I do that evil thing that I will not, I work not it, but the sin that dwelleth in me.
ROM 7:21 Therefore I find the law [[or a law]] to me willing to do good thing, for evil thing lieth to me.
ROM 7:22 For I delight together to the law of God, after the inner man.
ROM 7:23 But I see another law in my members, fighting against the law of my soul, and making me captive in the law of sin, that is in my members.
ROM 7:24 I am an unhappy [[or a woeful]] man; who shall deliver me from the body of this sin?
ROM 7:25 The grace of God, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Therefore I myself by the soul serve to the law of God; but by the flesh to the law of sin.
ROM 8:1 Therefore now nothing of condemnation is to them that be in Christ Jesus, which wander not after the flesh.
ROM 8:2 For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath delivered me from the law of sin, and of death, [[or the law of sin, and death]].
ROM 8:3 For that that was impossible to the law, in what thing it was sick by flesh, God sent his Son into the likeness of flesh of sin, and of sin condemned sin in flesh;
ROM 8:4 that the justifying of the law were fulfilled in us, that [[we]] go not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
ROM 8:5 For they that be after the flesh, understand [[or savour]] those things that be of the flesh; but they that be after the Spirit, feel those things that be of the Spirit.
ROM 8:6 For the prudence of flesh is death; but the prudence of Spirit is life and peace.
ROM 8:7 For the wisdom of the flesh is enemy to God; for it is not subject to the law of God, for neither it may [[be subject to the law]].
ROM 8:8 And they that be in flesh, may not please to God.
ROM 8:9 But ye be not in flesh, but in Spirit; if nevertheless the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. But if any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, this is not his.
ROM 8:10 For if Christ is in you, the body is dead for sin [[or from sin]], but the Spirit liveth for justifying.
ROM 8:11 And if the Spirit of him that raised Jesus Christ from death dwelleth in you, he that raised Jesus Christ from death, shall quicken also your deadly bodies, for the Spirit of him that dwelleth in you.
ROM 8:12 Therefore, brethren, we be debtors, not to the flesh, that we live after the flesh.
ROM 8:13 For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye by the Spirit slay the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live.
ROM 8:14 For whoever be led by the Spirit of God, these be the sons of God.
ROM 8:15 For ye have not taken again the spirit of servage in dread, but ye have taken the Spirit of adoption of sons, that is, sons of God by grace, in which we cry, Abba, Father.
ROM 8:16 And that Spirit yieldeth witnessing to our spirit, that we be the sons of God;
ROM 8:17 if sons, and heirs, heirs forsooth of God, and heirs together with Christ; if nevertheless we suffer together, that also we be glorified together.
ROM 8:18 And I deem, that the passions of this time be not even worthy, to the glory to coming [[or to come]], that shall be showed in us.
ROM 8:19 For the abiding of creature abideth the showing of the sons of God.
ROM 8:20 But the creature is subject to vanity, not willingly, but for him that made it subject in hope;
ROM 8:21 for that creature shall be delivered from servage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the sons of God.
ROM 8:22 And we know, that each creature sorroweth, and travaileth with pain till yet.
ROM 8:23 And not only it, but also we us-selves, that have the first fruits of the Spirit, and we us-selves sorrow within us for the adoption of God’s sons, abiding the again-buying of our body.
ROM 8:24 But by hope we be made safe. For hope that is seen, is not hope; for who hopeth that thing, that he seeth?
ROM 8:25 And if we hope that thing that we see not, we abide by patience.
ROM 8:26 And also the Spirit helpeth our infirmity; for what we shall pray, as it behooveth, we know not, but that Spirit asketh for us with sorrowings, that may not be told out.
ROM 8:27 For he that seeketh the hearts, knoweth what the Spirit desireth, for by God, [[that is, after God’s will]], he asketh for holy men.
ROM 8:28 And we know, that to men that love God, all things work together into good, to them that after purpose be called saints.
ROM 8:29 For those that he knew before, he before-ordained by grace to be made like to the image of his Son, that he be the first begotten among many brethren.
ROM 8:30 And those that he before-ordained to bless, them he called; and whom he called, them he justified; and whom he justified, them he glorified.
ROM 8:31 What then shall we say to these things? If God be for us, who is against us?
ROM 8:32 Which also spared not his own Son, but betook him for us all, how also gave he not to us all things with him?
ROM 8:33 Who shall accuse against the chosen men of God? It is God that justifieth,
ROM 8:34 who is it that condemneth? It is Jesus Christ that was dead, yea, the which rose again, the which is on the right half of God, and the which prayeth for us.
ROM 8:35 Who then shall part us from the charity of Christ? tribulation, or anguish, or hunger, or nakedness, or persecution, or peril, or sword?
ROM 8:36 As it is written, For we be slain all day for thee; we be guessed as sheep of slaughter [[or to slaughter]].
ROM 8:37 But in all these things we overcome, for him that loved us.
ROM 8:38 But I am certain, that neither death, neither life, neither angels, neither principalities, neither virtues, neither present things, neither things to coming [[or to come]], neither strength,
ROM 8:39 neither height, neither deepness, neither any other creature, may part us from the charity of God, that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
ROM 9:1 I say truth in Christ Jesus, I lie not, for my conscience beareth witnessing to me in the Holy Ghost,
ROM 9:2 for great heaviness is to me, and continual sorrow to my heart.
ROM 9:3 For I myself desired to be parted [[or cursed]] from Christ for my brethren, that be my cousins after the flesh,
ROM 9:4 that be men of Israel [[or Israelites]]; whose is adoption of sons, and glory, and testament, and giving of the law, and service, and promises;
ROM 9:5 whose be the fathers, and of which is Christ after the flesh, that is God above all things, blessed into worlds. Amen.
ROM 9:6 But not that the word of God hath fallen down, [[or failed unfulfilled]]. For not all that be of Israel, these be Israelites.
ROM 9:7 Neither they that be [[the]] seed of Abraham, all be sons; but in Isaac the seed shall be called to thee;
ROM 9:8 that is to say, not they that be sons of the flesh, be sons of God, but they that be sons of [[the]] promise be deemed in the seed.
ROM 9:9 For why this is the word of promise, After this time I shall come, and a son shall be to Sarah.
ROM 9:10 And not only she, but also Rebecca had two sons of one lying-by, [[or of one knowing of man]], of Isaac, our father.
ROM 9:11 And when they were not yet born, neither had done anything of good either evil, that the purpose of God should dwell by election, not of works, but of God calling,
ROM 9:12 it was said to him [[or to her]], That the more should serve the less,
ROM 9:13 as it is written, I loved Jacob, but I hated Esau.
ROM 9:14 What therefore shall we say? Whether wickedness be with God? God forbid.
ROM 9:15 For he saith to Moses, I shall have mercy on whom I shall have mercy; and I shall give mercy on whom I shall have mercy.
ROM 9:16 Therefore it is not neither of [[a]] man willing, neither running, but of God having mercy.
ROM 9:17 And the scripture saith to Pharaoh, For to this thing I have stirred thee, that I show in thee my virtue, and that my name be told in all [[the]] earth.
ROM 9:18 Therefore of whom God will, he hath mercy; and whom he will, he endureth.
ROM 9:19 Then sayest thou to me, What is sought yet? [[or What thing is yet sought?]] for who withstandeth his will?
ROM 9:20 O! man, who art thou, that answerest to God? Whether a made thing saith to him that made it, What hast thou made me so?
ROM 9:21 Whether a potter of clay hath not power to make of the same gobbet one vessel into honour, another into despite, [[or low office]]?
ROM 9:22 And if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, hath suffered in great patience vessels of wrath able into death, [[or into perdition, or damnation]],
ROM 9:23 to show the riches of his glory into vessels of mercy, which he made ready into glory.
ROM 9:24 Which also he called [[us]], not only of the Jews, but also of heathen men,
ROM 9:25 as he saith in Hosea, I shall call not my people my people, and not my loved my loved, and not getting mercy getting mercy;
ROM 9:26 and it shall be in the place, where it is said to them, Not ye my people, there they shall be called the sons of living God.
ROM 9:27 But Isaiah crieth for Israel, If the number of children of Israel shall be as [[the]] gravel of the sea, the remnants shall be made safe.
ROM 9:28 Forsooth a word making an end, and abridging in equity, for the Lord shall make a word abridged, [[or made short]], on all the earth.
ROM 9:29 And as Isaiah before-said, But God of hosts had left to us seed, we had been made as Sodom, and we had been like as Gomorrah.
ROM 9:30 Therefore what shall we say? That heathen men that pursued not right-wiseness, have gotten [[or have caught]] rightwiseness, yea, the right-wiseness that is of faith.
ROM 9:31 But Israel pursuing the law of rightwiseness, came not perfectly to the law of rightwiseness.
ROM 9:32 Why? For not of faith, but as of works. And they spurned against the stone of offence, [[or spurning]],
ROM 9:33 as it is written, Lo! I put a stone of offence in Zion, and a stone of stumbling; and each that shall believe in it, shall not be confounded, [[or shamed]].
ROM 10:1 Brethren, the will of mine heart and my beseeching is made to God for them into health.
ROM 10:2 But I bear witnessing to them, that they have the love of God, but not after knowing.
ROM 10:3 For they unknowing God’s right-wiseness, and seeking to make steadfast their own rightwiseness, be not subject to the rightwiseness of God.
ROM 10:4 For the end of the law is Christ, to rightwiseness to each man that believeth.
ROM 10:5 For Moses wrote, For the man that shall do rightwiseness that is of the law, shall live in it.
ROM 10:6 But the rightwiseness that is of belief, saith thus, Say thou not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? that is to say, to lead down Christ;
ROM 10:7 or who shall go down into hell? that is, to again-call Christ from death. [[+or who shall go down into deep-ness, or into depth? that is, to again-call Christ from the dead.]]
ROM 10:8 But what saith the scripture? The word is nigh in thy mouth, and in thine heart; this is the word of belief, which we preach.
ROM 10:9 That if thou acknowledge in thy mouth the Lord Jesus Christ, and believest in thine heart, that God raised him from death, thou shalt be safe.
ROM 10:10 For by heart me [[or men]] believeth to rightwiseness, but by mouth acknowledging is made to health.
ROM 10:11 For why the scripture saith, Each that believeth in him, shall not be confounded.
ROM 10:12 And there is no distinction of Jew and of Greek; for the same Lord of all is rich into all, that inwardly call him.
ROM 10:13 For each man, whoever shall inwardly call the name of the Lord, shall be safe.
ROM 10:14 How then shall they inwardly call him, into whom they have not believed? or how shall they believe to him, whom they have not heard? How shall they hear, without a preacher?
ROM 10:15 and how shall they preach, but they be sent? As it is written, How fair be the feet of them that preach [[or evangelize]] peace, of them that preach good things.
ROM 10:16 But not all men obey to the gospel. For Isaiah saith, Lord, who believed to our hearing?
ROM 10:17 Therefore faith is of hearing [[or by hearing]], but hearing by the word of Christ.
ROM 10:18 But I say, Whether they heard not? Yes, soothly, the sound of them went out into all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world.
ROM 10:19 But I say, Whether Israel knew not? First Moses saith, I shall lead you to envy, that ye be no folk [[or into not a folk]]; that ye be an unwise folk, I shall send you into wrath.
ROM 10:20 And Isaiah is bold, and saith, I am found of men that seek me not; openly I appeared to them, that asked not me.
ROM 10:21 But to Israel he saith, All day I stretched out mine hands to a people that believed not [[to me]], but gainsaid me.
ROM 11:1 Therefore I say, Whether God hath put away his people? God forbid. For I am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the lineage of Benjamin.
ROM 11:2 God hath not put away his people, which he before-knew. Whether ye know not, what the scripture saith in Elijah? How he prayeth God against Israel,
ROM 11:3 Lord, they have slain thy prophets, they have under-delved thine altars, and I am left alone, and they seek my life.
ROM 11:4 But what saith God’s answer to him? I have left to me seven thousands of men, that have not bowed their knees before Baal.
ROM 11:5 So therefore also in this time, the remnants be made safe, by the choosing of the grace of God.
ROM 11:6 And if it be by the grace of God, it is not now of works; else grace is not now grace.
ROM 11:7 What then? Israel hath not gotten this that he sought, but election hath gotten; and the others be blinded.
ROM 11:8 As it is written, God gave to them a spirit of compunction, eyes that they see not, and ears, that they hear not, into this day.
ROM 11:9 And David saith, Be the board of them made into a snare before them, and into catching, and into cause of stumbling, and into yielding [[again]] to them.
ROM 11:10 Be the eyes of them made dark, that they see not; and bow thou down always the back of them.
ROM 11:11 Therefore I say, Whether they offended so, that they should fall down? God forbid. But by the guilt of them health is made to heathen men, that they pursue them.
ROM 11:12 That if the guilt of them be riches of the world, and the making less [[or the diminishing]] of them be riches of heathen men, how much more the plenty of them?
ROM 11:13 But I say to you, heathen men, for as long as I am apostle of heathen men, I shall honour my ministry [[or my service]],
ROM 11:14 if in any manner I stir my flesh for to follow, and that I make some of them safe.
ROM 11:15 For if the loss of them is the reconciling of the world, what is the taking up [[of them]], but life of dead men? [[or but life to dead?]]
ROM 11:16 For if a little part of that that is tasted be holy, the whole gobbet is holy; and if the root is holy, also the branches.
ROM 11:17 What if any of the branches be broken, when thou were a wild olive tree, art grafted [[or art set in]] among them, and art made fellow of the root, and of the fatness of the olive tree,
ROM 11:18 do not thou have glory against the branches. For if thou gloriest, thou bearest not the root, but the root thee.
ROM 11:19 Therefore thou sayest, The branches be broken, that I be grafted in [[or I be inset]].
ROM 11:20 Well, for unbelief the branches be broken; but thou standest by faith. Do not thou understand [[or savour]] high things, but dread thou,
ROM 11:21 for if God spared not the kindly branches, [[see thou]] lest peradventure he spare not thee.
ROM 11:22 Therefore see the goodness, and the fierceness of God; yea, the fierceness into them that fell down, but the goodness of God into thee, if thou dwellest in goodness, else also thou shalt be cut down.
ROM 11:23 Yea, and they shall be set in [[or shall be inset]], if they dwell not in unbelief. For God is mighty, to set them in again.
ROM 11:24 For if thou art cut down of the kindly wild olive tree, and against kind art set into a good olive tree, how much more they that be by kind, shall be set in their olive tree?
ROM 11:25 But, brethren, I will not, that ye not know this mystery, that ye be not wise to yourselves; for blindness hath fallen a part in Israel, till that the plenty of heathen men entered,
ROM 11:26 and so all Israel should be made safe. As it is written, He shall come of Zion, that shall deliver, and turn away the wickedness [[or unpiety]] of Jacob.
ROM 11:27 And this testament to them of me, when I shall do away their sins.
ROM 11:28 After the gospel they be enemies for you, but they be most dearworthy by [[or after]] the election for the fathers.
ROM 11:29 And the gifts and the calling of God be without repenting, [[or revoking]].
ROM 11:30 And as sometime also ye believed not to God, but now ye have gotten mercy for the unbelief of them;
ROM 11:31 so and these now believed not into your mercy, that also they get mercy.
ROM 11:32 For God closed all things together in unbelief, that he have mercy on all.
ROM 11:33 O! the highness of the riches of the wisdom and of the knowing, of God; how incomprehensible be his dooms, and his ways be unsearchable.
ROM 11:34 For why who knew the wit of the Lord, or who was his counsellor?
ROM 11:35 or who former gave to him, and it shall be requited [[again]] to him?
ROM 11:36 For of him, and by him, and in him be all things. To him be glory into worlds [[of worlds]]. Amen.
ROM 12:1 Therefore, brethren, I beseech you by the mercy of God, that ye give your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing to God, and your service reasonable.
ROM 12:2 And do not ye be conformed to this world, but be ye reformed in newness of your wit, that ye prove which is the will of God, good, and well pleasing, and perfect.
ROM 12:3 For I say, by the grace that is given to me, to all that be among you, that ye understand not more than it behooveth to understand, but for to understand to soberness, [[or to not savour, or know, more than it behooveth to know, but to know to soberness]]; and to each man, as God hath parted the measure of faith.
ROM 12:4 For as in one body we have many members, but all the members have not the same deed [[or the same act]];
ROM 12:5 so we many be one body in Christ, and each be members one of another.
ROM 12:6 Therefore we that have gifts diversing, after the grace that is given to us, either prophecy, after the reason of faith;
ROM 12:7 either service [[or ministry]], in ministering; either he that teacheth, in teaching;
ROM 12:8 he that stirreth softly, in admonishing [[or in exhortation]]; he that giveth, in simpleness; he that is sovereign, [[or is prelate, or is before]], in busyness; he that hath mercy, in gladness.
ROM 12:9 Love without feigning, hating evil, drawing [[or fast cleaving]] to good;
ROM 12:10 loving together the charity of brotherhood. Each come before to worship other [[or Coming before together in honour]];
ROM 12:11 not slow in busyness, fervent in spirit, serving to the Lord,
ROM 12:12 joying in hope, patient in tribulation, busy in prayer,
ROM 12:13 giving good to the needs of saints, keeping hospitality.
ROM 12:14 Bless ye men that pursue you; bless ye, and do not ye curse;
ROM 12:15 for to joy with men that joy, for to weep with men that weep.
ROM 12:16 Feel ye the same thing together; not understanding, [[or savouring, or cunning]], high things, but consenting to meek things, [[following meek fathers]]. Do not ye be prudent with yourselves;
ROM 12:17 to no man yielding evil for evil, but purvey ye good things, not only before God, but also before all men.
ROM 12:18 If it may be done, that that is of you, have ye peace with all men.
ROM 12:19 Ye most dear brethren, not defending, [[or avenging]], yourselves, but give ye place to wrath [[or ire]]; for it is written, The Lord saith, To me vengeance, and I shall yield.
ROM 12:20 But if thine enemy hungereth, feed thou him; if he thirsteth, give thou drink to him; for thou doing this thing shalt gather together coals on his head [[or doing these things thou shalt gather together coals on his head]].
ROM 12:21 Do not thou be overcome of evil, but overcome thou evil by good.
ROM 13:1 Every soul be subject to higher powers. For there is no power but of God, and those things that be of God, be ordained.
ROM 13:2 Therefore he that against-standeth power, against-standeth the ordinance of God; and they that against-stand, get to themselves damnation.
ROM 13:3 For princes be not to the dread of good work, but of evil. But wilt thou, that thou dread not power? Do thou good thing, and thou shalt have praising of it;
ROM 13:4 for he is the minister of God to thee into good. But if thou doest evil, dread thou; for not without cause he beareth the sword, for he is the minister of God, avenger into wrath to him that doeth evil.
ROM 13:5 And therefore by need be ye subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience.
ROM 13:6 For therefore ye give tributes, they be the ministers of God, and serve for this same thing.
ROM 13:7 Therefore yield ye to all men debts, to whom tribute, tribute, to whom toll, [[or custom for things borne about]], toll, [[or such custom]], to whom dread, dread, to whom honour, honour.
ROM 13:8 To no man owe ye anything, but that ye love together. For he that loveth his neighbour, hath fulfilled the law.
ROM 13:9 For, Thou shalt do no lechery, Thou shalt not slay, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not say false witnessing, Thou shalt not covet the thing of thy neighbour, and if there be any other commandment, it is enstored, [[or enclosed]], or included, in this word, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
ROM 13:10 The love of thy neighbour worketh not evil; therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.
ROM 13:11 And we know this time, that the hour is now, that we rise from sleep; for now is our health near [[or nearer]], than when we believed.
ROM 13:12 The night went before, but the day hath nighed. Therefore cast we away the works of darknesses, and be we clothed in [[or with]] the armours of light.
ROM 13:13 As in [[the]] day wander we honestly, not in superfluous feasts [[or in oft eatings]], and drunkennesses, not in beds and unchastities, not in strife and in envy;
ROM 13:14 but be ye clothed in the Lord Jesus Christ, and do ye not the busyness [[or the cares]] of flesh in desires.
ROM 14:1 But take ye a sick man in belief, not in deemings, [[or in deceptions, or disputations]], of thoughts.
ROM 14:2 For another man believeth, that he may eat all things; but he that is sick, [[or unsteadfast]], eat worts.
ROM 14:3 He that eateth, despise not him that eateth not; and he that eateth not, deem not him that eateth. For God hath taken him to him [[or God hath taken him]].
ROM 14:4 Who art thou, that deemest another’s servant? To his lord he standeth, or falleth from him, [[or falleth down]]. But he shall stand; for the Lord is mighty to make him perfect, [[or to ordain him, or make steadfast]].
ROM 14:5 For why one deemeth a day betwixt a day, another deemeth each day. Each man increase in his wit.
ROM 14:6 He that understandeth [[or savoureth]] the day, understandeth [[or savoureth]] to the Lord. And he that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he doeth thankings to God. And he that eateth not, eateth not to the Lord, and doeth thankings to God.
ROM 14:7 For no man of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself.
ROM 14:8 For whether we live, we live to the Lord; and whether we die, we die to the Lord. Therefore whether we live or die, we be of the Lord [[or we be Lord’s]].
ROM 14:9 For why for this thing Christ was dead, and rose again, that he be Lord both of quick and of dead men [[or of quick and of dead]].
ROM 14:10 But what deemest thou thy brother? or why despisest thou thy brother? for all we shall stand before the throne of Christ.
ROM 14:11 For it is written, I live, saith the Lord, for to me each knee shall be bowed, and each tongue shall acknowledge to God.
ROM 14:12 Therefore each of us shall yield reason to God for himself.
ROM 14:13 Therefore no more deem we each other; but more deem ye this thing, that ye put not hurting, or cause of stumbling, to a brother.
ROM 14:14 I know and trust in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean by him, no but to him that deemeth anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
ROM 14:15 And if thy brother be made sorry, [[or heavy]], in conscience for meat, now thou walkest not after charity. Do not thou through thy meat lose him, for whom Christ died.
ROM 14:16 Therefore be not your good thing blasphemed [[or despised]].
ROM 14:17 For why the realm of God is not meat and drink, but rightwiseness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.
ROM 14:18 And he that in this thing serveth Christ, pleaseth God, and is proved to men.
ROM 14:19 Therefore pursue we those things that be of peace, and keep we together those things that be of edification.
ROM 14:20 Do not thou for meat lose the work of God. For all things be clean, but it is evil to the man that eateth by offending.
ROM 14:21 It is good to not eat flesh, and to not drink wine, neither in what thing thy brother offendeth, or is caused to stumble, or is made sick, [[or unsteadfast]].
ROM 14:22 Thou hast faith with thyself, have thou before God. Blessed is he that deemeth not himself in that thing that he approveth.
ROM 14:23 For he that deemeth, is condemned [[or is damned]], if he eateth; for it, [[his eating]], is not of faith. And all thing that is not of faith, is sin.
ROM 15:1 But we firmer men owe to sustain [[or to bear up]] the feeblenesses of sick men, [[or unfirm in faith]], and not [[to]] please to ourselves.
ROM 15:2 Each of us please to his neigh-bour in[[to]] good, to edification.
ROM 15:3 For Christ pleased not to himself, [[but]], as it is written, The reproofs, [[or shames]], of men despising thee, felled on me.
ROM 15:4 For whatever things be written, those be written to our teaching, that by patience and comfort of scriptures we have hope.
ROM 15:5 But God of patience and of solace give to you to understand the same thing, each into other, after Jesus Christ,
ROM 15:6 that ye of one will with one mouth worship God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ROM 15:7 For which thing take ye together, as also Christ took you into the honour of God.
ROM 15:8 For I say, that Jesus Christ was a minister of circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises of fathers.
ROM 15:9 And heathen men owe to honour God for mercy; as it is written, Therefore, Lord, I shall acknowledge to thee among heathen men, and I shall sing to thy name.
ROM 15:10 And again he saith, Ye heathen men, be ye glad [[or joy]] with his people.
ROM 15:11 And again, All heathen men, praise ye the Lord; and all peoples, magnify ye him.
ROM 15:12 And again Isaiah saith, There shall be a root of Jesse, that shall rise up to govern heathen men, and heathen men shall hope in him.
ROM 15:13 And God of hope full-fill you in all joy and peace in believing, that ye increase [[or abound]] in hope and virtue of the Holy Ghost.
ROM 15:14 And, brethren, I myself am certain of you, that also ye be full of love, and ye be [[full]]-filled with all knowing [[or all science]], so that ye may admonish each other.
ROM 15:15 And, brethren, more boldly I wrote to you a part, as bringing you into mind, for the grace that is given to me of God,
ROM 15:16 that I be the minister of Christ Jesus among heathen men. And I hallow the gospel of God, that the offering of heathen men be accepted [[or be made acceptable]], and hallowed in the Holy Ghost.
ROM 15:17 Therefore I have glory in Christ Jesus to God.
ROM 15:18 For I dare not speak anything of those things, which Christ doeth not by me, into obedience of heathen men, in word and deeds,
ROM 15:19 in virtue of tokens and great wonders, in virtue of the Holy Ghost, so that from Jerusalem by compass to the Illyricum sea [[or till unto Illyricum]], I have [[full]]-filled the gospel of Christ.
ROM 15:20 And so I have preached this gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I build upon another’s ground,
ROM 15:21 but as it is written, For to whom it is not told of him, they shall see, and they that heard not, shall understand.
ROM 15:22 For which thing I was hindered full much to come to you, and I am hindered till [[to]] this time.
ROM 15:23 And now I have not further place, [[or cause of longer dwelling]], in these countries, but I have desire to come to you, of many years that [[now]] be passed.
ROM 15:24 When I begin to pass into Spain, I hope that in my going I shall see you, and of you I shall be led thither, if I [[shall]] use you first in part.
ROM 15:25 Therefore now I shall pass forth to Jerusalem, to minister to saints.
ROM 15:26 For Macedonia and Achaia have assayed to make some gift, [[or some collection, or gathering of money]], to poor men of saints, that be in Jerusalem.
ROM 15:27 For it pleased to them, and they be debtors of them; for if heathen men be made partners of their ghostly things, they owe also in fleshly things to minister to them.
ROM 15:28 Therefore when I have ended this thing, and have assigned to them this fruit, I shall pass by you into Spain.
ROM 15:29 And I know, that I coming to you, shall come in the abundance, [[or plenty]], of the blessing of Christ.
ROM 15:30 Therefore, brethren, I beseech you by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the charity of the Holy Ghost, that ye help me in your prayers [[for me]] to the Lord,
ROM 15:31 that I be delivered from the unfaithful men, that be in Judea, and that the offering of my service be accepted in Jerusalem to saints;
ROM 15:32 that I come to you in joy, by the will of God, and that I be refreshed with you.
ROM 15:33 And God of peace be with you all. Amen.
ROM 16:1 And I commend to you Phebe, our sister, which is in the service of the church that is at Cenchrea,
ROM 16:2 that ye receive her in the Lord worthily to saints, and that ye help her in whatever cause she shall need of you. For she hath helped many men, and myself.
ROM 16:3 Greet Priscilla and Aquila, mine helpers in Christ Jesus,
ROM 16:4 which under-putted their necks for my life; to whom not I alone do thankings, but also all the churches of heathen men.
ROM 16:5 And greet ye well their menial church [[or their home-church]]. Greet well Epaenetus, beloved to me, that is the first of Asia in Christ, Jesus.
ROM 16:6 Greet well Mary, the which hath travailed much in us.
ROM 16:7 Greet well Andronicus and Junia, my cousins, and mine even-prisoners, which be noble among the apostles, and which were before me in Christ.
ROM 16:8 Greet well Amplias, most dear-worthy to me in the Lord.
ROM 16:9 Greet well Urbane, our helper in Christ Jesus, and Stachys, my darling [[or my beloved]].
ROM 16:10 Greet well Apelles, the noble in Christ [[or noble in Christ]]. Greet well them that be of Aristobulus’ house.
ROM 16:11 Greet well Herodion, my cousin. Greet well them that be of Narcissus’ house, that be in the Lord.
ROM 16:12 Greet well Tryphena and Tryphosa, which women travail in the Lord. Greet well Persis, most dearworthy woman, that hath travailed much in the Lord.
ROM 16:13 Greet well Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his mother, and mine.
ROM 16:14 Greet well Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and brethren that be with them.
ROM 16:15 Greet well Philologus, and Julia, and Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints that be with them.
ROM 16:16 Greet ye well together in holy kiss. All the churches of Christ greet you well.
ROM 16:17 But, brethren, I pray you, that ye espy them that make dissensions and hurtings [[or offences]], besides the doctrine that ye have learned, and bow away from them.
ROM 16:18 For such men serve not to the Lord Christ, but to their womb, and by sweet words and blessings deceive the hearts of innocent men.
ROM 16:19 But your obedience is published into every place, therefore I have joy in you. But I will, that ye be wise in good thing, and simple in evil.
ROM 16:20 And God of peace tread Satan under your feet swiftly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
ROM 16:21 Timothy, mine helper, greeteth you well, and also Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my cousins.
ROM 16:22 I Tertius greet you well, that wrote this epistle, in the Lord.
ROM 16:23 Gaius, mine host, greeteth you well, and all the church. Erastus, treasurer, [[or keeper]], of the city, greeteth you well, and Quartus [[the]] brother.
ROM 16:24 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
ROM 16:25 And honour and glory be to him, that is mighty to confirm you by my gospel, and preaching of Jesus Christ, by the revelation of mystery held still, [[that is, not showed]], in times ever-lasting;
ROM 16:26 which mystery is now made open by scriptures of prophets, by the commandment of God without begin-ning and ending, to the obedience of faith in all heathen men,
ROM 16:27 the mystery known by Jesus Christ to God alone wise [[or the mystery known to God alone wise by Jesus Christ]], to whom be honour and glory into worlds of worlds. Amen.
1CO 1:1 Paul, called apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Sosthenes, brother,
1CO 1:2 to the church of God that is at Corinth, to them that be hallowed in Christ Jesus, and called saints, with all that inwardly call [[or in-call]] the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, in each place of them and of ours,
1CO 1:3 grace to you and peace of God, our Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
1CO 1:4 I do thankings to my God ever-more for you, in the grace of God that is given to you in Christ Jesus.
1CO 1:5 For in all things ye be made rich in him, in each word, and in each knowing, [[or science]],
1CO 1:6 as the witnessing of Christ is confirmed in you;
1CO 1:7 so that nothing fail to you in any grace, that abide the showing [[or the revelation]] of our Lord Jesus Christ;
1CO 1:8 which also shall confirm you into the end without crime, [[or great sin]], in the day of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1CO 1:9 A true God [[or Forsooth God is true]], by whom ye be called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
1CO 1:10 But, brethren, I beseech you, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say the same thing, and that dissensions, [[or schisms, or divisions, or discords]], be not among you; but be ye perfect in the same wit, and in the same knowing.
1CO 1:11 For, my brethren, it is told to me of them that be at Chloe’s, that strives be among you.
1CO 1:12 And I say that, that each of you saith, For I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos, and I am of Cephas, [[that is, Peter]], but I am of Christ.
1CO 1:13 Whether Christ is parted? whether Paul was crucified for you, either ye be baptized in the name of Paul?
1CO 1:14 I do thankings to my God, that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius;
1CO 1:15 lest any man say, that ye be baptized in my name.
1CO 1:16 And I baptized also the house of Stephanas, but I know not, that I baptized any other.
1CO 1:17 For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel [[or to evangelize]]; not in wisdom of word, that the cross of Christ be not voided away.
1CO 1:18 For the word of the cross is folly to them that perish; but to them that be made safe, that is to say, to us, it is the virtue of God.
1CO 1:19 For it is written, I shall destroy the wisdom of wise men, and I shall reprove the prudence of prudent men.
1CO 1:20 Where is the wise man? where is the wise lawyer? [[or where is the writer, or the man of law?]] where is the purchaser of this world? Whether God hath not made the wisdom of this world fond? [[or foolish?]]
1CO 1:21 For the world, in wisdom of God, knew not God by wisdom, [[or For why for in the wisdom of God, the world knew not God by wisdom]], it pleased to God, by [[the]] folly of preaching, to make them safe that believed.
1CO 1:22 For Jews seek signs, and Greeks seek wisdom;
1CO 1:23 but we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews cause of stumbling, and to heathen men folly;
1CO 1:24 but to those Jews and Greeks that be called, we preach Christ the virtue of God, and the wisdom of God.
1CO 1:25 For that that is folly thing of God, is wiser than men; and that that is the feeble, [[or frail]], thing of God, is stronger than men.
1CO 1:26 But, brethren, see ye your calling; for not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble.
1CO 1:27 But God chose those things that be fond [[or foolish]] of the world, to confound wise men; and God chose the feeble, [[or frail]], things of the world, to confound the strong things;
1CO 1:28 and God chose the unnoble things and despisable things of the world, and those things that be not, to destroy those things that be;
1CO 1:29 that each man have not glory in his sight.
1CO 1:30 But of him ye be in Christ Jesus, which is made of God to us wisdom, and rightwiseness, and holiness, and again-buying;
1CO 1:31 that, as it is written, He that glorieth, have glory in the Lord.
1CO 2:1 And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not in the highness of word, either of wisdom, telling, [[or showing]], to you the witnessing of Christ.
1CO 2:2 For I deemed not me to know anything among you, but Christ Jesus, and him crucified.
1CO 2:3 And I in sickness, and dread, and in much trembling, was among you [[or was with you]];
1CO 2:4 and my word and my preaching was not in subtly stirring [[or persuad-able]] words of man’s wisdom, but in showing of Spirit and of virtue;
1CO 2:5 that your faith be not in the wisdom of men, but in the virtue of God.
1CO 2:6 For we speak wisdom among perfect men, but not wisdom of this world, neither of princes of this world, that be destroyed;
1CO 2:7 but we speak the wisdom of God in mystery, which wisdom is hid; which wisdom God before-ordained before worlds into our glory,
1CO 2:8 which none of the princes of this world knew; for if they had known, they should never have crucified the Lord of glory.
1CO 2:9 But as it is written, That eye saw not, nor ear heard, neither it ascended into the heart of man, what things God arrayed [[or made ready before]] to them that love him;
1CO 2:10 but God showed to us by his Spirit. For why the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.
1CO 2:11 And who of men knoweth, what things be of man, but the spirit of man that is in him? So what things be of God, no man knoweth, but the Spirit of God.
1CO 2:12 And we have not received the spirit of this world, but the Spirit that is of God, that we know what things be given to us of God.
1CO 2:13 Which things we speak also, not in wise [[or in taught]] words of man’s wisdom, but in the doctrine of the Spirit, and make a likeness [[or a comparison]] of spiritual things to ghostly men.
1CO 2:14 For a beastly man perceiveth not those things that be of the Spirit of God; for it is folly to him, and he may not understand, for it is examined, [[or assayed]], ghostly.
1CO 2:15 But a spiritual man deemeth all things, and he is deemed of no man.
1CO 2:16 As it is written, And who knew the wit of the Lord, or who taught him? And we have the wit of Christ.
1CO 3:1 And I, brethren, might not speak to you as to spiritual men, but as to fleshly men; as to little children in Christ,
1CO 3:2 I gave to you milk to drink, not meat; for ye might not yet under-stand, neither ye may now,
1CO 3:3 for yet ye be fleshly. For while envy and strife is among you, whether ye be not fleshly, and ye go after man?
1CO 3:4 For when some saith, I am of Paul, and another, But I am of Apollos, whether ye be not [[fleshly]] men?
1CO 3:5 What therefore is Apollos, and what Paul? They be ministers of him, to whom ye have believed; and to each man as God hath given.
1CO 3:6 I planted, Apollos moisted, but God gave increasing.
1CO 3:7 Therefore neither he that planteth is anything, neither he that moisteth, but God that giveth increasing.
1CO 3:8 And he that planteth, and he that moisteth, be one; and each shall take his own meed, after his travail.
1CO 3:9 For we be the helpers of God; ye be the earth-tilling of God, ye be the building of God.
1CO 3:10 After the grace of God that is given to me, as a wise master carpenter I setted the foundament; and another buildeth above. But each man see, how he buildeth above [[or how and what things he buildeth upon]].
1CO 3:11 For no man may set another foundament, except [[or besides]] that that is set, which is Christ Jesus.
1CO 3:12 For if any man buildeth over [[or upon]] this foundament, gold, silver, precious stones, sticks, hay, or stubble,
1CO 3:13 every man’s work shall be open; for the day of the Lord shall declare, for it shall be showed in fire; the fire shall prove the work of each man, what manner work it is.
1CO 3:14 If the work of any man dwell still, which he builded above [[or upon]], he shall receive meed.
1CO 3:15 If any man’s work burn, he shall suffer harm, either impairing; but he shall be safe, so nevertheless as by fire.
1CO 3:16 Know ye not, that ye be the temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?
1CO 3:17 And if any [[man]] defouleth the temple of God, God shall lose him; for the temple of God is holy, which ye be.
1CO 3:18 No man deceive himself. If any man among you is seen to be wise in this world, be he made a fool, that he be wise.
1CO 3:19 For the wisdom of this world is folly with God; for it is written, I shall catch wise men in their fell wisdom, [[or subtle guile]];
1CO 3:20 and again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of wise men, for those be vain.
1CO 3:21 Therefore no man have glory in men. For all things be yours,
1CO 3:22 either Paul, either Apollos, either Cephas, either the world, either life, either death, either things present, either things to coming [[or to come]]; for all things be yours,
1CO 3:23 and ye be of Christ, and Christ is of God.
1CO 4:1 So a man guess, [[or deem]], us as ministers of Christ, and dispensers of the mysteries of God.
1CO 4:2 Now it is sought here among the dispensers, that a man be found true.
1CO 4:3 And to me it is for the least thing, that I be deemed of you, or of man’s day, [[that is, here in this life]]; but neither I deem myself.
1CO 4:4 For I am nothing over-trusting, [[or guilty]], to myself, but not in this thing I am justified; for he that deemeth me, is the Lord.
1CO 4:5 Therefore do not ye deem before the time, till that the Lord come, which shall lighten the hid things of darknesses, and shall show the counsels of hearts; and then praising shall be to each man of God.
1CO 4:6 And, brethren, I have transfigured these things into me and into Apollos, for you; that in us ye learn, lest over that it is written [[or over that that is written]], one against another be blown with pride for another [[man]].
1CO 4:7 Who deemeth thee? And what hast thou, that thou hast not received? And if thou hast received, what gloriest thou, as thou haddest not received?
1CO 4:8 Now ye be [[full]]-filled, now ye be made rich; ye reign without us; and I would that ye reign, that also we reign with you.
1CO 4:9 And I guess, that God showed us the last apostles, as those that be sent to the death; for we be made a spectacle to the world, and to angels, and to men.
1CO 4:10 We fools for Christ, but ye prudent in Christ; we sick, but ye strong; ye noble, but we unnoble.
1CO 4:11 Till into this hour we hunger, and thirst, and be naked, and be smitten with buffets, and we be unstable, [[moving from place to place]],
1CO 4:12 and we travail working with our hands; we be cursed, and we bless; we suffer persecution, and we abide long;
1CO 4:13 we be blasphemed, and we beseech; as cleansings of this world we be made the out-casting of all things till yet.
1CO 4:14 I write not these things, that I confound you, but I warn you as my most dearworthy sons.
1CO 4:15 For why if ye have ten thousand of undermasters in Christ, but not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have engendered you by the gospel.
1CO 4:16 Therefore, brethren, I pray you, be ye followers of me, as I of Christ.
1CO 4:17 Therefore I sent to you Timothy, which is my most dearworthy son, and faithful in the Lord, which shall teach you my ways, that be in Christ Jesus; as I teach everywhere in each church.
1CO 4:18 As though I should not come to you, so some be blown with pride;
1CO 4:19 but I shall come to you soon, if God will; and I shall know not the word of them that be blown with pride, but the virtue.
1CO 4:20 For the realm of God is not in word, but in virtue.
1CO 4:21 What will ye? Shall I come to you in a rod, or in charity, and in a spirit of mildness?
1CO 5:1 Yet all manner of fornication is heard among you, and such fornication, which is not among heathen men, so that some man have the wife of his father.
1CO 5:2 And ye be swollen [[or blown]] with pride, and not more had wailing, that he that did this work, be taken away from the middle of you.
1CO 5:3 And I absent in body, but present in spirit, now have deemed, as present, him that hath thus wrought,
1CO 5:4 when ye be gathered together in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and my spirit, with the virtue of the Lord Jesus,
1CO 5:5 to betake such a man to Satan, into the perishing of flesh, that the spirit be safe in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1CO 5:6 Your glorying is not good. Know ye not, that a little sourdough impaireth [[or corrupteth]] all the gobbet?
1CO 5:7 Cleanse ye out the old sourdough, that ye be new sprinkling together, as ye be therf, [[or without souring]]. For Christ offered is our pask.
1CO 5:8 Therefore eat we, not in old sourdough, neither in sourdough of malice and waywardness, but in therf things of clearness, and of truth.
1CO 5:9 I wrote to you in an epistle, that ye be not meddled, [[or mingled, or commune not]], with lechers,
1CO 5:10 not with lechers of this world, nor with covetous men, nor raveners, nor with men serving to maumets [[or to idols]], else ye should have gone out of this world.
1CO 5:11 But now I have written to you, that ye be not meddled, [[or mingled, or commune not with such]]. If he that is named a brother among you, and is a lecher, or covetous, or serving to idols, or a curser, or full of drunkenness, or a ravener, to take no meat with such.
1CO 5:12 For what is it to me to deem of them that be withoutforth? Whether ye deem not of things [[or of them]] that be withinforth?
1CO 5:13 For God shall deem them that be withoutforth. Do ye away evil from yourselves.
1CO 6:1 Dare any of you that hath a cause against another, be deemed at wicked men, and not at holy men [[or saints]]?
1CO 6:2 Whether ye know not, that saints shall deem this world? And if the world shall be deemed by you, be ye unworthy to deem the least things?
1CO 6:3 Know ye not, that we shall deem angels? how much more worldly things?
1CO 6:4 Therefore if ye have worldly dooms, ordain ye those contemptible men, [[or of little reputation]], that be in the church, to deem.
1CO 6:5 I say to make you ashamed [[or I say to your shame]]. So there is not any wise man, that may deem betwixt a brother and his brother;
1CO 6:6 but brother with brother striveth in doom, and that among unfaithful men.
1CO 6:7 And now trespass is always among you, for ye have dooms among you. Why rather take ye not wrong? why rather suffer ye not deceit [[or fraud]]?
1CO 6:8 But also ye do wrong, and do fraud [[or and defraud]], and that to brethren.
1CO 6:9 Whether ye know not, that wicked men shall not wield the kingdom of God? Do not ye err; neither lechers, neither men that serve maumets [[or idols]], neither adulterers, neither lechers against kind, neither they that do lechery with men,
1CO 6:10 neither thieves, neither avaricious [[or covetous]] men, neither men full of drunkenness, neither cursers, neither raveners, shall wield the kingdom of God.
1CO 6:11 And ye were sometime these things; but ye be washed, but ye be hallowed, but ye be justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Spirit of our God.
1CO 6:12 All things be leaveful to me, but not all things be speedful. All things be leaveful to me, but I shall not be brought down under any man’s power.
1CO 6:13 Meat to the womb, and the womb to meats; and God shall destroy both this and that. And the body not to fornication, but to the Lord, and the Lord to the body.
1CO 6:14 For God raised the Lord, and shall raise us by his virtue.
1CO 6:15 Know ye not, that your bodies be members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, and shall I make them the members of a whore? God forbid.
1CO 6:16 Whether ye know not, that he that cleaveth to a whore, is made one body? For he saith, There shall be twain in one flesh.
1CO 6:17 And he that cleaveth to the Lord, is one Spirit.
1CO 6:18 Flee ye fornication; all sin what-ever sin a man doeth, is without the body; but he that doeth fornication, sinneth against his body.
1CO 6:19 Whether ye know not, that your members be the temple of the Holy Ghost, that is in you, whom ye have of God, and ye be not your own?
1CO 6:20 For ye be bought with great price. Glorify ye, and bear ye God in your body.
1CO 7:1 But of those things that ye have written to me, it is good to a man to touch not a woman.
1CO 7:2 But for fornication each man have his own wife, and each woman have her own husband.
1CO 7:3 The husband yield debt to the wife, and also the wife to the husband.
1CO 7:4 The woman hath not power of her body, but the husband; and the husband hath not power of his body, but the woman [[or the wife]].
1CO 7:5 Do not ye defraud each to other, but peradventure of consent for a time, that ye give attention to prayer; and again turn again to the same thing, lest Satan tempt you for your uncontinence.
1CO 7:6 But I say this thing as giving leave [[or by indulgence]], not by command-ment.
1CO 7:7 For I will, that all men be as myself. But each man hath his proper gift of God; one thus, and another thus.
1CO 7:8 But I say to them, that be not wedded, and to widows, it is good to them, if they dwell so as I.
1CO 7:9 And if they contain not them-selves, [[or be not chaste]], be they wedded; for it is better to be wedded, than to be burnt.
1CO 7:10 But to them that be joined in matrimony, I command, not I, but the Lord, that the wife depart not from the husband;
1CO 7:11 and that if she departeth, that she dwell unwedded, or be reconciled to her husband; and the husband forsake not the wife.
1CO 7:12 But to others I say, not the Lord. If any brother hath an unfaithful, [[or heathen]], wife, and she consenteth to dwell with him, leave he her not.
1CO 7:13 And if any woman hath an unfaithful husband, and this consenteth to dwell with her, leave she not the husband.
1CO 7:14 For the unfaithful husband is hallowed by the faithful woman, and the unfaithful woman is hallowed by the faithful husband. Else your children were unclean, but now they be holy.
1CO 7:15 That if the unfaithful departeth, depart he. For why the brother or sister is not subject to servage in such; for God hath called us in peace.
1CO 7:16 And whereof knowest thou, woman, if thou shalt make the man safe; or whereof knowest thou, man, if thou shalt make the woman safe?
1CO 7:17 But as the Lord hath parted to each, and as God hath called each man, so go he, as I teach in all churches.
1CO 7:18 A man circumcised is called, bring he not to prepuce. A man is called in prepuce, be he not circumcised.
1CO 7:19 Circumcision is nought, and prepuce is nought, but the keeping of the commandments of God.
1CO 7:20 Each man in what calling he is called, in that dwell he.
1CO 7:21 Thou [[a]] servant art called, be it no charge to thee; but if thou mayest be made free, use it rather.
1CO 7:22 He that is a servant, and is called in the Lord, is a free man of the Lord. Also he that is a free man, and is called, is the servant of Christ.
1CO 7:23 With price ye be bought; do not ye be made servants of men.
1CO 7:24 Therefore each man in what thing he is called a brother, dwell he in this with God.
1CO 7:25 But of virgins I have no command-ment of God; but I give counsel, as he that hath gotten mercy of the Lord, that I be true.
1CO 7:26 Therefore I guess, that this thing is good for the present need; for it is good to [[or for]] a man to be so.
1CO 7:27 Thou art bound to a wife, do not thou seek unbinding; thou art unbound from a wife, do not thou seek a wife.
1CO 7:28 But if thou hast taken a wife, thou hast not sinned; and if a maiden is wedded, she sinned not; nevertheless such shall have tribulation of flesh. But I spare you.
1CO 7:29 Therefore, brethren, I say this thing, The time is short. Another is this, that they that have wives, be as though they had none;
1CO 7:30 and they that weep, as they wept not; and they that joy, as they joyed not; and they that buy, as they had not;
1CO 7:31 and they that use this world, as they that use [[it]] not. For why the figure, [[or fairness]], of this world passeth.
1CO 7:32 But I will, that ye be without busyness, for he that is without wife, is busy what things be of the Lord, how he shall please God.
1CO 7:33 But he that is with a wife, is busy what things be of the world, how he shall please the wife [[or his wife]], and he is parted.
1CO 7:34 And a woman unwedded and [[a]] maiden thinketh what things be of the Lord, that she be holy in body and spirit. But she that is wedded, thinketh what things be of the world, how she shall please the husband [[or her husband]].
1CO 7:35 And I say these things to your profit, not that I cast to you a snare, but to that that is seemly, and that giveth easiness [[or facility]], without hindering to make prayers, [[or to beseech]], to the Lord.
1CO 7:36 And if any man guesseth himself to be seen foul on his virgin, that she is full waxen [[or is well old]], and so it behooveth to be done, do she that that she will [[or what he will]]; she sinneth not, if she be wedded, [[+or s/he sinneth not, if s/he be wedded]].
1CO 7:37 For he that ordained stably, [[or steadfastly]], in his heart, not having need, but having power of his will, and hath deemed in his heart this thing, to keep his virgin [[or his virginity]], doeth well.
1CO 7:38 Therefore he that joineth his virgin in matrimony, doeth well; and he that joineth not, doeth better.
1CO 7:39 The woman is bound to the law, as long time as her husband liveth; and if her husband is dead, she is delivered from the law of the husband, be she wedded to whom she will, only in the Lord.
1CO 7:40 But she shall be more blessed, if she dwelleth thus, after my counsel; and I ween, that I have the Spirit of God.
1CO 8:1 But of these things that be sacrificed to idols, we know, for all we have knowing. But knowing [[or science]], bloweth [[with pride]], charity edifieth.
1CO 8:2 But if any man guesseth, [[or deem]], that he knoweth anything, he hath not yet known how it behooveth him to know.
1CO 8:3 And if any man loveth God, this is known of him.
1CO 8:4 But of meats that be offered to idols, we know, that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one.
1CO 8:5 For though there be some that be said gods, either in heaven, either in earth, as there be many gods, and many lords;
1CO 8:6 nevertheless to us is one God, the Father, of whom be all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom be all things, and we by him.
1CO 8:7 But not in all men is knowing. For some men with conscience of idol, that is, they guess that the idol is some divine thing, till now eat as thing offered to idols; and their conscience is defouled, for it is sick.
1CO 8:8 Meat commendeth us not to God; for neither we shall fail, if we eat not, neither if we eat, we shall have plenty [[or we shall abound]].
1CO 8:9 But see ye, lest peradventure this your leave [[or license]] be made hurting to sick men, [[or frail]].
1CO 8:10 For if any man shall see him, that hath knowing, eating in a place where idols be worshipped, whether his conscience, since it is sick, shall not be edified to eat things offered to idols?
1CO 8:11 And the sick, [[or unsteadfast]], brother, for whom Christ died, shall perish in thy knowing.
1CO 8:12 For thus ye sinning against brethren, and smiting their sick conscience, sin against Christ.
1CO 8:13 Wherefore if meat causeth my brother to stumble, I shall never eat flesh, lest I cause my brother to stumble.
1CO 9:1 Whether I am not free? Am I not apostle? Whether I saw not Jesus Christ, our Lord? Whether ye be not my work in the Lord?
1CO 9:2 And though to others I am not apostle, but nevertheless to you I am; for ye be the little sign of mine apostlehood in the Lord.
1CO 9:3 My defence to them that ask me, that is [[or is this]].
1CO 9:4 Whether we have not power to eat and drink?
1CO 9:5 Whether we have not power to lead about a woman, a sister, as also other apostles, and brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?
1CO 9:6 Or I alone and Barnabas have not power to work these things?
1CO 9:7 Who travaileth any time with his own [[soldier’s]] wages? Who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of his fruit? Who keepeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?
1CO 9:8 Whether after man I say these things? whether also the law saith not these things?
1CO 9:9 For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not bind [[up]] the mouth of the ox that thresheth. Whether of oxen is charge to God?
1CO 9:10 Whether for us he saith these things? For why those be written for us; for he that eareth, oweth to ear in hope, and he that thresheth, in hope to take fruits.
1CO 9:11 If we sow spiritual things to you, is it great, if we reap your fleshly things?
1CO 9:12 If others be partners of your power, why not rather we? But we use not this power, but we suffer all things, that we give no hindering to the evangel of Christ.
1CO 9:13 Know ye not, that they that work in the temple, eat those things that be of the temple, and they that serve to the altar, be partners of the altar?
1CO 9:14 So the Lord ordained to them that tell the gospel, to live of the gospel.
1CO 9:15 But I used none of these things; and I wrote not these things, that they be done so in me; for it is good rather for me to die, than that any man avoid my glory.
1CO 9:16 For if I preach the gospel, glory is not to me, for need-like I must do it; for woe to me, if I preach not the gospel.
1CO 9:17 But if I do this thing willfully [[or willingly]], I have meed; but if against my will, dispensing [[or dispensation]] is betaken to me.
1CO 9:18 What then is my meed? That I preaching the gospel, put the gospel without others’ cost, [[or expense, either taking of sustenance therefore]], that I use [[or mis-use]] not my power in the gospel.
1CO 9:19 For why when I was free of all men, I made me servant of all men, to win the more men [[or that I should win more men]].
1CO 9:20 And to Jews I am made as a Jew, to win the Jews; to them that be under the law, as I were under the law, when I was not under the law, to win them that were under the law;
1CO 9:21 to them that were without law, as I were without law, when I was not without [[the]] law of God, but I was in the law of Christ, to win them that were without [[the]] law.
1CO 9:22 I am made sick to sick men, to win sick men; to all men I am made all things, to make all men safe.
1CO 9:23 But I do all things for the gospel, that I be made partner of it.
1CO 9:24 Know ye not, that they that run in a furlong, all run, but one taketh the prize? So run ye, that ye catch.
1CO 9:25 Each man that striveth in fight, abstaineth him from all things; and they, that they take a corruptible crown, but we an uncorrupt.
1CO 9:26 Therefore I run so, not as to an uncertain thing; thus I fight, not as beating the air;
1CO 9:27 but I chastise my body, and bring it into servage [[or servitude]]; lest peradventure when I preach to others, I myself be made reprovable.
1CO 10:1 Brethren, I will not, that ye unknow, that all our fathers were under [[a]] cloud, and all passed the sea;
1CO 10:2 and all were baptized in Moses, in the cloud and in the sea;
1CO 10:3 and all ate the same spiritual meat,
1CO 10:4 and all drank the same spiritual drink; and they drank of the spiritual stone following them; and the stone was Christ.
1CO 10:5 But not in full many of them it was well pleasant to God; for why they were cast down in [[the]] desert.
1CO 10:6 But these things were done in figure of us, that we be not coveters of evil things, as they coveted.
1CO 10:7 Neither be ye made idolaters, as some of them; as it is written, The people sat to eat and drink, and they rose up to play.
1CO 10:8 Neither do we fornication, as some of them did fornication, and three and twenty thousand were dead in one day.
1CO 10:9 Neither tempt we Christ, as some of them tempted, and perished of serpents.
1CO 10:10 Neither grutch ye, as some of them grutched, and they perished of a destroyer [[or of the waster]].
1CO 10:11 And all these things fell to them in figure; but they be written to our amending [[or correction]], into whom the ends of the worlds be come [[or the ends of the world have come]].
1CO 10:12 Therefore he that guesseth him, that he standeth, see he, that he fall not.
1CO 10:13 Temptation take not you, but man’s temptation; for God is true, which shall not suffer you to be tempted above that that ye may; but he shall make with temptation also purveyance, that ye may suffer [[or sustain]].
1CO 10:14 Wherefore, ye most dearworthy to me, flee ye from the worshipping of maumets [[or idols]].
1CO 10:15 As to prudent men I speak, deem ye yourselves [[or ye yourselves deem]] that thing that I say.
1CO 10:16 Whether the cup of blessing which we bless, is not the communing of Christ’s blood? and whether the bread which we break, is not the part-taking of the body of the Lord?
1CO 10:17 For we many be one bread and one body, all we that take part of one bread and of one cup.
1CO 10:18 See ye Israel after the flesh, whether they that eat sacrifices, be not partners of the altar?
1CO 10:19 What therefore say I, that a thing that is offered to idols is anything, or that the idol is anything?
1CO 10:20 But those things that heathen men offer, they offer to devils, and not to God. But I will not, that ye be made fellows of fiends;
1CO 10:21 for ye may not drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of fiends; ye may not be partners of the board of the Lord, and of the board of fiends.
1CO 10:22 Whether we have envy to the Lord? whether we be stronger than he?
1CO 10:23 All things be leaveful to me, but not all things be speedful. All things be leaveful to me, but not all things edify.
1CO 10:24 No man seek that thing that is his own, but that thing that is of another.
1CO 10:25 All thing that is sold in the butchery, eat ye, asking nothing for conscience.
1CO 10:26 The earth and the plenty of it, is the Lord’s.
1CO 10:27 If any of heathen [[or of unfaithful]] men call you to supper, and ye will go, all thing that is set to you, eat ye, asking nothing for conscience.
1CO 10:28 But if any man saith, This thing is offered to idols, do not ye eat, for him that showed [[this thing]], and for conscience;
1CO 10:29 and I say not, thy conscience, but of another [[man’s]]. But whereto is my freedom [[or my liberty]] deemed of another man’s conscience?
1CO 10:30 Therefore if I take part with grace, what am I blasphemed, for that that I do thankings [[or graces]]?
1CO 10:31 Therefore whether ye eat, or drink, or do any other thing, do ye all things to the glory of God.
1CO 10:32 Be ye without offence to Jews, and to heathen men, and to the church of God;
1CO 10:33 as I by all things please to all men, not seeking that that [[or what]] is profitable to me, but that that is profitable to many men, that they be made safe.
1CO 11:1 Be ye my followers, as I am of Christ.
1CO 11:2 And, brethren, I praise you, that by all things ye be mindful of me; and as I betook to you my commandments, ye hold [[or ye keep]].
1CO 11:3 But I will that ye know, that Christ is [[the]] head of each man; but the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God.
1CO 11:4 Each man praying, or prophesying, when his head is covered, defouleth his head.
1CO 11:5 But each woman praying, or prophesying, when her head is not covered, defouleth her head; for it is one, as if she were polled, [[or were made bald, or clipped]].
1CO 11:6 And if a woman be not covered [[or veiled]], be she polled; and if it is foul thing to a woman to be polled, or to be made bald, cover she her head.
1CO 11:7 But a man shall not cover his head, for he is the image and glory of God; but a woman is the glory of man.
1CO 11:8 For a man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man.
1CO 11:9 And the man is not made for the woman, but the woman for the man.
1CO 11:10 Therefore the woman shall have a covering on her head, also for angels.
1CO 11:11 Nevertheless neither the man is without the woman, neither the woman is without [[the]] man, in the Lord.
1CO 11:12 For why as the woman is of the man, so the man is by the woman; but all things be of God.
1CO 11:13 Deem ye yourselves; beseemeth [[or becometh]] it a woman not covered on the head to pray to God?
1CO 11:14 Neither the kind itself teacheth us [[that]], for if a man nourish long hair, it is shame to him;
1CO 11:15 but if a woman nourish long hair, it is glory to her, for hairs be given to her for covering.
1CO 11:16 But if any man is seen to be full of strife, we have none such custom, neither the church of God.
1CO 11:17 But this thing I command, not praising, that ye come together not into the better, but into the worse.
1CO 11:18 First for when ye come together into the church, I hear that dissensions, either partings, be, and in part I believe.
1CO 11:19 For it behooveth heresies to be, that they that be approved, be openly known in you.
1CO 11:20 Therefore when ye come together into one, now it is not to eat the Lord’s supper;
1CO 11:21 for why each man before taketh his supper to eat, and one is hungry, and another is drunken.
1CO 11:22 Whether ye have not houses to eat and drink, or ye despise the church of God, and confound, [[or shame]], them that have none? [[or that have not?]] What shall I say to you? I praise you, but herein [[or in this thing]] I praise you not.
1CO 11:23 For I have taken of the Lord that thing, which I have betaken to you. For the Lord Jesus, in what night he was betrayed, took bread,
1CO 11:24 and did thankings [[or graces]], and brake, and said, Take ye, and eat ye; this is my body, which shall be betrayed for you; do ye this thing into my mind.
1CO 11:25 Also [[he took]] the cup, after that he had supped, and said, This cup is the new testament in my blood; do ye this thing, as oft as ye shall drink [[it]], into my mind.
1CO 11:26 For as oft as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye shall tell [[or show]] the death of the Lord, till that he come [[or till he come]].
1CO 11:27 Therefore whoever eateth the bread, or drinketh the cup of the Lord unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and of the blood of the Lord.
1CO 11:28 But prove a man himself, and so eat he of that bread, and drink he of the cup.
1CO 11:29 For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh doom, [[or damnation]], to him[[self]], not wisely deeming the body of the Lord.
1CO 11:30 Therefore among you many be sick and feeble [[or unstrong]], and many sleep, [[or die]].
1CO 11:31 And if we deemed wisely us-selves, we should not be deemed;
1CO 11:32 but while we be deemed of the Lord, we be chastised, that we be not condemned with this world.
1CO 11:33 Therefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, abide ye together.
1CO 11:34 If any man hungereth, eat he at home, that ye come not together into doom. And I shall dispose other things, when I come.
1CO 12:1 But of spiritual things, brethren, I will not that ye unknow.
1CO 12:2 For ye know, that when ye were heathen men, how ye were led going to dumb maumets [[or dumb simulacra]].
1CO 12:3 Therefore I make known to you, that no man speaking in the Spirit of God, saith departing from Jesus; and no man may say the Lord Jesus [[is]], but in the Holy Ghost.
1CO 12:4 And diverse graces there be, but it is all one Spirit;
1CO 12:5 and diverse services there be, but it is all one Lord;
1CO 12:6 and diverse workings there be, but it is all one God, that worketh all things in all things.
1CO 12:7 And to each man the showing of Spirit is given to profit.
1CO 12:8 And the word of wisdom is given to one by Spirit; to another the word of knowing, by the same Spirit;
1CO 12:9 faith to another, in the same Spirit; to another, grace of healings [[or of healths]], in one Spirit;
1CO 12:10 to another, the working of virtues; to another, prophecy; to another, very knowing [[or discretion]] of spirits; to another, kinds of languages [[or tongues]]; to another, expounding [[or interpreting]] of words.
1CO 12:11 And one and the same Spirit worketh all these things, parting to each by themselves as he will.
1CO 12:12 For as there is one body, and hath many members, and all the members of the body when those [[or they]] be many, be one body, so also Christ.
1CO 12:13 For in one Spirit all we be baptized into one body, either Jews, either heathen, either servants, either free; and all we be filled with drink [[or have drunk]] in one Spirit.
1CO 12:14 For the body is not one member, but many.
1CO 12:15 If the foot shall say, For I am not the hand, I am not of the body; not therefore it is not of the body.
1CO 12:16 And if the ear saith, For I am not the eye, I am not of the body; not therefore it is not of the body.
1CO 12:17 If all the body is the eye, where is [[the]] hearing? and if all the body is hearing, where is [[the]] smelling?
1CO 12:18 But now God hath set [[or put]] members, and each of them in the body, as he would.
1CO 12:19 And if all were one member, where were the body?
1CO 12:20 But now there be many members, but one body.
1CO 12:21 And the eye may not say to the hand, I have no need to thy works; or again the head to the feet, Ye be not necessary to me.
1CO 12:22 But much more those that be seen to be the lower members of the body, [[or the more sick]], be more needful;
1CO 12:23 and those that we guess to be the unworthier [[or the unnobler]] members of the body, to them we give more honour; and those members that be unhonest, have more honesty.
1CO 12:24 For our honest members have need of none; but God tempered the body, giving more worship to it, to whom it failed,
1CO 12:25 that debate be not in the body, but that the members be busy into the same thing each for other [[or for each other]].
1CO 12:26 And if one member suffereth any-thing, all members suffer therewith; either if one member joyeth [[or glorieth]], all members joy together.
1CO 12:27 And ye be the body of Christ, and members of member.
1CO 12:28 But God set some men in the church, first apostles, the second time prophets [[or the second prophets]], the third teachers, afterward virtues, afterward graces of healings, helpings, governings, kinds of languages, interpretations of words.
1CO 12:29 Whether all [[be]] apostles? whether all [[be]] prophets? whether all teachers? whether all virtues?
1CO 12:30 whether all have grace of healings? whether all speak with languages? whether all expound [[or interpret]]?
1CO 12:31 But pursue ye the better ghostly gifts. And yet I show to you a more excellent, [[or worthy]], way.
1CO 13:1 If I speak with tongues of men and of angels, and I have not charity, I am made as brass sounding, or a cymbal tinkling.
1CO 13:2 And if I have prophecy, and know all mysteries, and all knowing, [[or science]], and if I have all faith, so that I move hills from their place, [[or from one place to another]], and I have not charity, I am nought.
1CO 13:3 And if I part all my goods into the meats of poor men, and if I betake my body, so that I burn, and if I have not charity, it profiteth to me nothing.
1CO 13:4 Charity is patient, it is benign; charity envieth not, it doeth not wickedly, it is not blown [[with pride]],
1CO 13:5 it is not covetous, [[or ambitious, or covetous of worships]], it seeketh not those things that be his own [[or her own]], it is not stirred to wrath, it thinketh not evil,
1CO 13:6 it joyeth not on [[or in]] wicked-ness, but it joyeth together to [[or with]] truth;
1CO 13:7 it suffereth all things, it believeth all things, it hopeth all things, it sustaineth all things.
1CO 13:8 Charity falleth never down, whether prophecies shall be voided, either languages shall cease, either science shall be destroyed.
1CO 13:9 For a part we know, and a part we prophesy;
1CO 13:10 but when that shall come that is perfect, that thing that is of part shall be voided.
1CO 13:11 When I was a little child, I spake as a little child, I understood as a little child, I thought as a little child; but when I was made a man, I avoided/I voided those things that were of a little child.
1CO 13:12 And we see now by a mirror in darkness, but then face to face; now I know of part, but then I shall know, as I am known.
1CO 13:13 And now dwell faith, hope, charity, these three; but the most of these is charity.
1CO 14:1 Pursue ye charity, love ye spiritual things, but more that ye prophesy.
1CO 14:2 And he that speaketh in tongue, speaketh not to men, but to God; for no man heareth. But the Spirit speaketh mysteries.
1CO 14:3 For he that prophesieth, speaketh to men to edification, and admonishing, and comforting.
1CO 14:4 He that speaketh in tongue, that is, in strange language, edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth, edifieth the church of God.
1CO 14:5 And I will, that all ye speak in tongues, but more that ye prophesy. For he that prophesieth, is more than he that speaketh in languages, [[or in tongues]]; but peradventure he expound, [[or interpret, or declare]], that the church take edification.
1CO 14:6 But now, brethren, if I come to you, and speak in tongues, what shall I [[or it]] profit to you, but if I speak to you either in revelation, either in science, either in prophecy, either in teaching?
1CO 14:7 For those things that be without soul, [[or life]], and giveth voices, either pipe, either harp, but those [[or they]] give distinction of soundings, how shall it be known that that is sung, either that that is trumped [[or is harped]].
1CO 14:8 For if a trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall make himself ready to battle?
1CO 14:9 So but ye give an open word by tongue, how shall that that is said be known? For ye shall be speaking in vain [[or in the air]].
1CO 14:10 There be many kinds of languages [[or tongues]] in this world, and nothing is without voice.
1CO 14:11 But if I know not the virtue of a voice, I shall be to him, to whom I shall speak, a barbaric; and he that speaketh to me, shall be a barbaric.
1CO 14:12 So ye, for ye be lovers of spirits, [[that is, of ghostly gifts]], seek ye that ye be plenteous to edification of the church.
1CO 14:13 And therefore he that speaketh in language [[or in tongue]], pray, that he expound [[or interpret]].
1CO 14:14 For if I pray in tongue, my spirit prayeth; mine understanding, [[or my mind, or reasoning]], is without fruit.
1CO 14:15 What then? I shall pray in spirit, I shall pray in mind; I shall say psalm in spirit, I shall say psalm also in mind.
1CO 14:16 For if thou blessest in spirit, who filleth the place of an idiot, [[or unlearned man]], how shall he say Amen on thy blessing, for he knoweth not, what thou sayest?
1CO 14:17 For thou doest well thankings [[or graces]], but another man is not edified.
1CO 14:18 I thank my God, for I speak in the language [[or the tongue]] of all you;
1CO 14:19 but in the church I will speak five words in my wit, that also I teach other men, than ten thousand words in tongue [[not understood]].
1CO 14:20 Brethren, do not ye be made children in wits, but in malice be ye children; but in wits be ye perfect.
1CO 14:21 For in the law it is written, That in other tongues and other lips I shall speak to this people, and neither so they shall hear me, saith the Lord.
1CO 14:22 Therefore languages be into token, not to faithful men, but to men out of the faith; but prophecies be not to men out of the faith, but to faithful men.
1CO 14:23 Therefore if all the church come together into one, and all men speak in tongues, if idiots, either men out of the faith, enter, whether they shall not say, What, be ye mad?
1CO 14:24 But if all men prophesy, if any unfaithful man or idiot enter, he is convicted of all, he is wisely deemed of all.
1CO 14:25 For the hid things of his heart be known, and so he shall fall down on the face, and shall worship God, and show verily that God is in you.
1CO 14:26 What then, brethren? When ye come together, each of you hath a psalm, he hath teaching, he hath apocalypse, [[or revelation]], he hath tongue, he hath expounding [[or interpreting]]; all things be they done to edification.
1CO 14:27 Whether a man speaketh in tongue, [[be this done]] by two men, either three at the most, and by parts, that one interpret.
1CO 14:28 But if there be not an interpreter, be he still [[or speak he not]] in the church, and speak he to himself and to God.
1CO 14:29 Prophets twain or three say, and others wisely deem.
1CO 14:30 But if anything be showed to a sitter [[or one sitting]], the former be still.
1CO 14:31 For ye may all prophesy, each by himself, that all men learn, and all admonish.
1CO 14:32 And the spirits of prophets be subject to prophets;
1CO 14:33 for why God is not of dissension, but of peace; as I teach in all churches of holy men.
1CO 14:34 Women in churches be still; for it is not suffered to them to speak, but to be subject, as the law saith.
1CO 14:35 But if they will anything learn, ask they their husbands at home; for it is foul thing to a woman to speak in the church.
1CO 14:36 Whether the word of God came forth of you, or to you alone it came?
1CO 14:37 If any man is seen to be a prophet, or spiritual, know he those things that I write to you, for those [[or they]] be the commandments of the Lord.
1CO 14:38 And if any man unknoweth, he shall be unknowing.
1CO 14:39 Therefore, brethren, love ye to prophesy, and do not ye forbid to speak in tongues.
1CO 14:40 But be all things done honestly, and by due order in you.
1CO 15:1 Soothly, brethren, I make the gospel known to you, which I have preached to you, which also ye have taken, in which ye stand,
1CO 15:2 by which also ye shall be saved; by which reason I have preached to you, if ye hold, if ye have not believed idly.
1CO 15:3 For I betook to you at the beginning [[or in the first]] that thing which also I have received; that Christ was dead for our sins, by the scriptures;
1CO 15:4 and that he was buried, and that he rose again in the third day, after [[the]] scriptures;
1CO 15:5 and that he was seen to Cephas, and after these things to eleven;
1CO 15:6 afterward he was seen to more than five hundred brethren together, of which many live yet, but some be dead;
1CO 15:7 afterward he was seen to James, and afterward to all the apostles.
1CO 15:8 And last of all he was seen also to me, as to a dead-born child.
1CO 15:9 For I am the least of the apostles, that am not worthy to be called apostle, for I pursued the church of God.
1CO 15:10 But by the grace of God I am that thing that I am; and his grace was not void in me. For I travailed more plenteously than all they; but not I, but the grace of God with me.
1CO 15:11 But whether I, or they, so we have preached, and so ye have believed.
1CO 15:12 And if Christ is preached, that he rose again from death, how say some men among you, that the again-rising of dead men is not?
1CO 15:13 And if the again-rising of dead men is not, neither Christ rose again from death.
1CO 15:14 And if Christ rose not, our preaching is vain, our faith is vain.
1CO 15:15 And we be found false witnesses of God, for we have said witnessing against God, that he raised Christ, whom he raised not, if dead men rise not again.
1CO 15:16 For why if dead men rise not again, neither Christ rose again;
1CO 15:17 and if Christ rose not again, our faith is vain; and yet ye be in your sins.
1CO 15:18 And then they that have died [[or slept]] in Christ, have perished.
1CO 15:19 If in this life only we be hoping in Christ, we be more wretches than all men.
1CO 15:20 But now Christ hath risen [[or rose]] again from death, the first fruit of dead men;
1CO 15:21 for death was by a man, and by a man is again-rising from death.
1CO 15:22 And as in Adam all men die, so in Christ all men shall be quickened.
1CO 15:23 But each man in his order; the first fruit [[or first fruits]], Christ, afterward they that be of Christ, that believed in the coming of Christ;
1CO 15:24 afterward an end, when he shall betake the kingdom to God and to the Father, when he shall void all princehood, and power, and virtue.
1CO 15:25 But it behooveth him to reign, till he put all his enemies under his feet.
1CO 15:26 And at the last, death the enemy shall be destroyed;
1CO 15:27 for he hath made subject all things under his feet. And when he saith, all things be subject to him, without doubt except him that subjected all things to him.
1CO 15:28 And when all things be subjected to him, then the Son himself shall be subject to him, that made all things subject to him, that God be all things in all things.
1CO 15:29 Else what shall they do, that be baptized for dead men, if in no wise dead men rise again? whereto be they baptized for them?
1CO 15:30 And whereto be we in peril every hour?
1CO 15:31 Each day I die for your glory, brethren, which glory I have in Christ Jesus our Lord.
1CO 15:32 If after man I have fought to beasts, [[or against beasts]], at Ephesus, what profiteth it to me, if dead men rise not again? Eat we, and drink we, for we shall die tomorrow [[or tomorrow forsooth we shall die]].
1CO 15:33 Do not ye be deceived; for evil speeches, [[or false doctrine]], destroy good conduct [[or corrupt good virtues]].
1CO 15:34 Awake ye, just men, and do not ye do sin [[or do not ye sin]]; for some men have ignorance of God, but to reverence, that is, to your shame, I speak to you.
1CO 15:35 But some man saith, How shall dead men rise again, or in what manner body shall they come?
1CO 15:36 [[O!]] Unwise man, that thing that thou sowest, is not quickened, but it die first;
1CO 15:37 and that thing that thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that is to come, but a naked corn, as of wheat, or of some other seeds;
1CO 15:38 and God giveth to it a body, as he will, and to each of seeds a proper body.
1CO 15:39 Not each flesh is the same flesh, but one is of men, another is of beasts, another is of birds, another is of fishes.
1CO 15:40 And there be heavenly bodies, and there be earthly bodies; but one glory is of heavenly bodies, and another is of earthly [[bodies]].
1CO 15:41 Another clearness is of the sun, another clearness is of the moon, and another clearness is of the stars; and a star diverseth from a star in clearness.
1CO 15:42 And so the again-rising of dead men. It is sown in corruption, it shall rise in uncorruption;
1CO 15:43 it is sown in unnobleness, it shall rise in glory; it is sown in infirmity, it shall rise in virtue;
1CO 15:44 it is sown a beastly body, it shall rise a spiritual body. If there is a beastly body, there is also a spiritual body;
1CO 15:45 as it is written, The first man Adam was made into a soul living, the last Adam into a spirit quickening.
1CO 15:46 But the first is not that [[body]] that is spiritual, but that that is beast-like, afterward that that is spiritual.
1CO 15:47 The first man of earth is earthly; the second man of heaven is heavenly.
1CO 15:48 Such as the earthly man is, such be the earthly men; and such as the heavenly man is, such be also the heavenly men.
1CO 15:49 Therefore as we have borne the image of the earthly man, bear we also the image of the heavenly man.
1CO 15:50 Brethren, I say this thing, that flesh and blood may not wield the king-dom of God, neither corruption shall wield uncorruption [[or incorruption]].
1CO 15:51 Lo! I say to you private [[or a mystery]] of holy things. And all we shall rise again, but not all we shall be changed to the state of glory;
1CO 15:52 in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, in the last trump; for the trump shall sound, and dead men shall rise again, without corruption, and we shall be changed.
1CO 15:53 For it behooveth this corruptible thing to clothe uncorruption [[or incorruption]], and this deadly thing to put away [[or to clothe]] undeadliness.
1CO 15:54 But when this deadly thing shall clothe undeadliness, then shall the word be done [[or fulfilled]], that is written, Death is sopped up in victory.
1CO 15:55 Death, where is thy victory? Death, where is thy prick?
1CO 15:56 But the prick of death is sin; and the virtue of sin is the law.
1CO 15:57 But do we thankings to God, that gave to us victory by our Lord Jesus Christ.
1CO 15:58 Therefore, my dearworthy brethren, be ye steadfast, and unmoveable, being plenteous in work of the Lord, evermore witting that your travail is not idle in the Lord.
1CO 16:1 But of the gatherings [[or the collects]]of money that be made into saints, as I have ordained in the churches of Galatia, so also do ye
1CO 16:2 one day of the week. Each of you keep, [[or lay up]], at himself, keeping that that pleaseth to him, that when I come, the gatherings be not made.
1CO 16:3 And when I shall be present, which men ye approve, I shall send them by epistles to bear your grace into Jerusalem.
1CO 16:4 That if it be worthy that also I go, they shall go with me.
1CO 16:5 But I shall come to you, when I shall pass by Macedonia; for why I shall pass by Macedonia.
1CO 16:6 But peradventure I shall dwell at you, or also dwell the winter, that ye lead me whither ever I shall go.
1CO 16:7 And I will not now see you in my passing, for I hope to dwell with you a while, if the Lord shall suffer.
1CO 16:8 But I shall dwell at Ephesus, unto Whitsuntide.
1CO 16:9 For a great door and an open [[or evident]] is opened to me, and many adversaries.
1CO 16:10 And if Timothy come, see ye that he be without dread with you, for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I.
1CO 16:11 Therefore no man despise him; but lead him forth in peace, that he come to me; for I abide him with brethren.
1CO 16:12 But, brethren, I make known to you of Apollos, that I prayed him much, that he should come to you, with brethren. But it was not his will to come now; but he shall come, when he shall have leisure [[or it shall be able to him]].
1CO 16:13 Walk ye, and stand ye in the faith; do ye manly, and be ye comforted in the Lord,
1CO 16:14 and be all your things done in charity.
1CO 16:15 And, brethren, I beseech you, ye know the house of Stephanas, and of Fortunatus, and Achaicus, for they be the first fruits of Achaia, and into ministry of saints they have ordained themselves;
1CO 16:16 that also ye be subjects to such, and to each working together and travailing.
1CO 16:17 For I have joy in the presence of Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus; for they [[full]]-filled that thing that failed to you;
1CO 16:18 for they have refreshed both my spirit and yours. Therefore know ye them, that be such manner men.
1CO 16:19 All the churches of Asia greet you well. Aquila and Priscilla, with their home-church, greet you much in the Lord, at the which also I am harboured.
1CO 16:20 All brethren greet you well. Greet ye well together in holy kiss.
1CO 16:21 My greeting by Paul’s hand.
1CO 16:22 If any man loveth not our Lord Jesus Christ, be he cursed, Maranatha, that is, in the coming of the Lord, or in the day of doom.
1CO 16:23 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
1CO 16:24 My charity be with you all in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.
GAL 1:1 Paul the apostle, not of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, that raised him from death,
GAL 1:2 and all the brethren that be with me, to the churches of Galatia,
GAL 1:3 grace to you and peace of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ,
GAL 1:4 that gave himself for our sins, to deliver us from the present wicked world, by the will of God and our Father,
GAL 1:5 to whom is honour and glory into worlds of worlds. Amen.
GAL 1:6 I wonder, that so soon ye be thus moved from him that called you into the grace of Christ, into another evangel [[or another gospel]];
GAL 1:7 which is not another, but that there be some that trouble you, and will mis-turn the evangel of Christ.
GAL 1:8 But though we, or an angel of heaven, preached to you, besides that that we have preached to you, be he accursed.
GAL 1:9 As I have said before, and now again I say, if any man preach to you besides that that ye have received, be he accursed [[or cursed be he]].
GAL 1:10 For now whether counsel I men, or God? or whether I seek to please men? If I pleased yet men, I were not Christ’s servant.
GAL 1:11 For, brethren, I make known to you the evangel [[or the gospel]], that was preached of me, for it is not by man;
GAL 1:12 nor I took it of man, nor learned, but by [[the]] revelation of Jesus Christ.
GAL 1:13 For ye have heard my conver-sation sometime in the Jewry, that I pursued surpassingly, [[or over-manner, or over-measure]], the church of God, and fought against it.
GAL 1:14 And I profited in the Jewry above many of mine even-elders in my kindred, and was more abundantly a follower [[or a lover]] of my fathers’ traditions.
GAL 1:15 But when it pleased him, that parted me from my mother’s womb, and called by his grace,
GAL 1:16 to show his Son in me, that I should preach him among the heathen, anon I drew me not to flesh and blood;
GAL 1:17 nor I came to Jerusalem to the apostles, that were before me, but I went into Arabia, and again I turned again into Damascus.
GAL 1:18 And since three years after I came to Jerusalem [[or Afterward after three years I came to Jerusalem]], to see Peter, and I dwelled with him fifteen days;
GAL 1:19 but I saw none other of the apostles, but James, our Lord’s brother.
GAL 1:20 And these things which I write to you, lo! before God I lie not.
GAL 1:21 Afterward I came into the coasts of Syria and Cilicia.
GAL 1:22 But I was unknown by face to the churches of Judea, that were in Christ;
GAL 1:23 and they had only an hearing, that he that pursued us sometime, preacheth now the faith, against which he fought sometime;
GAL 1:24 and in me they glorified God.
GAL 2:1 And since fourteen years after [[or Afterward after fourteen years]], again I went up to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took with me Titus.
GAL 2:2 I went up by revelation, and spake with them the evangel [[or the gospel]], which I preach among the heathen; and by themselves to these that seemed to be somewhat, lest I run [[or lest peradventure I should run]], or had run in vain.
GAL 2:3 And neither Titus, that had been with me, while he was heathen, was compelled to be circumcised;
GAL 2:4 but for false brethren that were brought in, which had [[privily]] entered to espy our freedom [[or our liberty]], which we have in Jesus Christ, to bring [[or to drive]] us into servage.
GAL 2:5 But we gave no place to subjection, that the truth of the gospel should dwell with you.
GAL 2:6 But of these that seemed to be somewhat; which they were some-time, it pertaineth not to me, for God taketh not the person of man; for they that seemed to be somewhat, gave me nothing.
GAL 2:7 But on the contrary, when they had seen, that the evangel of prepuce was given to me [[or that the gospel of heathen men is betaken to me]], as the evangel of circumcision was given to Peter;
GAL 2:8 for he that wrought to Peter in apostlehood of circumcision, wrought also to me among the heathen;
GAL 2:9 and when they had known the grace of God, that was given to me, James, and Peter [[or Cephas]], and John, which were seen to be the pillars, they gave the right hand of fellowship to me and to Barnabas, that we [[preach]] among the heathen, and they into the circumcision;
GAL 2:10 only that we had mind of, [[or that we should be mindful of]], poor men, the which thing I was full busy to do.
GAL 2:11 But when Peter was come to Antioch, I against-stood him in the face, for he was worthy to be reproved.
GAL 2:12 For before that there came some men from James [[or before that some came from James]], he ate with heathen men; but when they were come, he withdrew, and departed him, dreading them that were of circumcision.
GAL 2:13 And the other Jews assented [[or consented]] to his feigning, so that Barnabas was drawn of them into that feigning.
GAL 2:14 But when I saw, that they walked not rightly to the truth of the gospel, I said to Peter [[or to Cephas]] before all men, If thou, that art a Jew, livest heathen-like, and not Jew-like, how constrainest thou heathen men to become Jews?
GAL 2:15 We Jews of kind, and not sinful men of the heathen,
GAL 2:16 know that a man is not justified of the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ; and we believe in Jesus Christ, that we be justified of [[or by]] the faith of Christ, and not of the works of the law. Wherefore of the works of the law each flesh shall not be justified.
GAL 2:17 And if we seek to be justified in Christ, we ourselves be found sinful men [[or to be sinners]], whether Christ be minister of sin? God forbid.
GAL 2:18 And if I build again things that I have destroyed, I make myself a trespasser.
GAL 2:19 For by the law I am dead to the law, [[For by the law I am dead to the law, that I live to God;]]
GAL 2:20 and I am fixed to the cross, that I live to God with Christ. And now live not I, but Christ liveth in me. But that I live now in flesh, I live in the faith of God’s Son, that loved me, and gave himself for me. [[with Christ I am fixed to the cross. Forsooth I live now, not I, but Christ liveth in me. Forsooth that I live now in flesh, I live in the faith of God’s son, the which loved me, and betook himself for me.]]
GAL 2:21 I cast not away the grace of God; for if rightwiseness be through [[or is by]] law, then Christ died without cause.
GAL 3:1 O! unwitting Galatians, before whose eyes Jesus Christ is exiled, [[or O! ye witless men of Galatia, before whose eyes Jesus Christ is damned or condemned]], and is crucified in you, who hath deceived you, that ye obey not to truth?
GAL 3:2 This only I desire to learn of you, whether ye have received the Spirit of the works of the law, or of hearing of belief?
GAL 3:3 So ye be fools, that when ye have begun in Spirit, [[now]] ye be ended in flesh.
GAL 3:4 So great things [[or So many things]] ye have suffered without cause, if it be without cause.
GAL 3:5 He that giveth to you [[the]] Spirit, and worketh virtues in you, whether of [[the]] works of the law, or of hearing of belief? [[or of faith?]]
GAL 3:6 As it is written, Abraham believed to God, and it was reckoned to him to rightwiseness.
GAL 3:7 And therefore know ye, that these that be of belief [[or they that be of faith]], be the sons of Abraham.
GAL 3:8 And the scripture seeing afar, that God justifieth the heathen of belief, [[or Forsooth the scripture purveying, for God justifieth of faith heathen men]], told before to Abraham, That in thee all the heathen [[or all folks]] shall be blessed.
GAL 3:9 And therefore these that be of belief, [[or they that be of faith]], shall be blessed with faithful Abraham.
GAL 3:10 For all that be of the works of the law, be under curse; for it is written, Each man is cursed, that abideth not [[or that dwelleth not]] in all things that be written in the book of the law, to do those things.
GAL 3:11 And that no man is justified in the law before God, it is open, for a rightful man liveth of belief. [[Forsooth for no man is justified in the law with God, it is known, for a rightful man liveth by faith.]]
GAL 3:12 But the law is not of belief, but he that doeth those things of the law, shall live in them.
GAL 3:13 But Christ again-bought us [[or delivered us]] from the curse of the law, and was made accursed for us; for it is written, Each man is cursed that hangeth in the tree;
GAL 3:14 that among the heathen the blessing of Abraham were made in Jesus Christ, that we receive the promise of Spirit through belief. [[that the blessing of Abraham in heathen men should be made in Christ Jesus, that we take the promise of Spirit by faith.]]
GAL 3:15 Brethren, I say after man, no man despiseth the testament of a man that is confirmed, or ordaineth above [[other thing]].
GAL 3:16 The promises were said to Abraham and to his seed; he saith not, In [[the]] seeds, as in many, but as in one, And to thy seed, that is, Christ.
GAL 3:17 But I say, this testament is confirmed of God; the law that was made after four hundred and thirty years, maketh not the testament vain to void away the promise [[or maketh not void for to do away the promise]].
GAL 3:18 For if [[the]] heritage were of the law, it were not now of promise. But God granted [[or gave]] to Abraham through promise.
GAL 3:19 What then the law? that is, Whereto is the law profitable? [[or What therefore profiteth the law?]] It was set for trespassing, till the seed came, to whom he had made the promise. Which law was ordained by angels, in the hand of a mediator.
GAL 3:20 But a mediator is not of one. But God is one.
GAL 3:21 Is then the law against the promises of God? God forbid. For if the law were given, that might quicken, verily were rightfulness of law, [[or verily rightwiseness were of law]].
GAL 3:22 But the scripture hath concluded all things under sin, that the promise of the faith of Jesus Christ were given to them that believe.
GAL 3:23 And before that belief came, they were kept under the law, enclosed into that belief that was to be showed. [[Forsooth before that the faith came, we were kept under the law, shut together into that faith that was to be showed.]]
GAL 3:24 And so the law was our under-master in Christ, that we be justified of belief [[or of faith]].
GAL 3:25 But after that belief came, we be not now under the undermaster. [[But after that the faith came, now we be not under the little master.]]
GAL 3:26 For all ye be the children of God through the belief of Jesus Christ. [[For all ye be the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.]]
GAL 3:27 For all ye that be baptized, be clothed with Christ.
GAL 3:28 There is no Jew, nor Greek, no bondman, nor free man, no male, nor female; for all ye be one in Christ Jesus.
GAL 3:29 And if ye be one in Jesus Christ, then ye be the seed of Abraham, and heirs by promise.
GAL 4:1 But I say, as long time as the heir is a little child, he diverseth nothing from a servant, when he is lord of all things [[or lord of all]];
GAL 4:2 but he is under keepers and tutors, into the time determined of the father.
GAL 4:3 So we, when we were little children, we served under the elements of the world.
GAL 4:4 But after that the fulfilling of time came, God sent his Son, made of a woman, made under the law,
GAL 4:5 that he should again-buy them that were under the law, that we should receive the adoption of sons.
GAL 4:6 And for ye be God’s sons, God sent his Spirit into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. [[Forsooth for ye be the sons of God, God sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, that is, father.]]
GAL 4:7 And so there is not now a servant, but a son; and if he is a son, he is an heir by God.
GAL 4:8 But then ye unknowing God, served to them that in kind were not gods.
GAL 4:9 But now when ye have known God, and be known of God, how be ye turned again to the feeble [[or the sick]] and needy elements, to the which ye will again serve?
GAL 4:10 Ye take keep to days, [[or Ye keep, or wait on, days]], and months, and times, and years.
GAL 4:11 But I dread you, lest without cause, I have travailed among you, [[or lest peradventure I have travailed in you without cause]].
GAL 4:12 Be ye as I, for I am as ye. Brethren, I beseech you, ye have hurt me nothing [[or ye have nothing hurt me]].
GAL 4:13 But ye know, that by infirmity of flesh I have preached [[or I have evangelized]] to you now before;
GAL 4:14 and ye despised not, neither forsook your temptation in my flesh, but ye received me as an angel of God, as Christ Jesus.
GAL 4:15 Where then is your blessing? [[or Where is therefore your blessedness, that ye had before time?]] For I bear you witness, that if it might have been done, ye would have put out your eyes, and have given them to me.
GAL 4:16 Am I then made an enemy to you, saying to you the sooth?
GAL 4:17 They love not you well [[or They love you not well]], but they will exclude you, that ye pursue them.
GAL 4:18 But pursue ye the good evermore in good, and not only when I am present with you.
GAL 4:19 My small children, which I bear again, till that Christ be formed in you, [[My little sons, whom I child, or I bring forth by travail, again, till Christ be formed in you,]]
GAL 4:20 and I would now be at you, and change my voice, for I am confounded among you.
GAL 4:21 Say to me, ye that will be under the law, have ye not read the law?
GAL 4:22 For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, one of a servant [[or a handmaiden]], and one of a free woman [[or a wife]].
GAL 4:23 But he that was of the servant [[or the handmaiden]] was born after the flesh; but he that was of the free woman [[or the wife]] by a promise.
GAL 4:24 The which things be said by another understanding [[or allegory]]. For these be two testaments; one in the hill of Sinai [[or mount Sinai]], engendering into servage, which is Agar.
GAL 4:25 For Sinai is an hill that is in Arabia, which hill is joined to it that is now Jerusalem, and serveth with her children.
GAL 4:26 But that Jerusalem that is above, is free, which is our mother.
GAL 4:27 For it is written, Be glad, thou barren, that bearest not; break out and cry, [[thou]] that bringest forth no children; for many sons be of her that is left of her husband, more than of her that hath an husband.
GAL 4:28 For, brethren, we be [[the]] sons of promise after Isaac;
GAL 4:29 but now as this that was born after the flesh pursued him that was after the Spirit, so now.
GAL 4:30 But what saith the scripture? Cast out the servant [[or the handmaiden]] and her son, for the son of the servant shall not be heir with the son of the free wife.
GAL 4:31 And so, brethren, we be not sons of the servant [[or of the handmaiden]], but of the free wife, by which freedom [[or liberty]] Christ hath made us free.
GAL 5:1 Stand ye therefore, and do not ye again be held in the yoke of servage.
GAL 5:2 Lo! I, Paul, say to you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall nothing profit to you.
GAL 5:3 And I witness again to each man that circumciseth himself, that he is a debtor of all the law to be done.
GAL 5:4 And ye be voided away from Christ, and ye that be justified in the law, ye have fallen away from grace.
GAL 5:5 For we through the Spirit of belief abide the hope of rightwiseness. [[For we by Spirit of faith abide the hope of rightwiseness.]]
GAL 5:6 For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision is anything worth, neither prepuce, but the belief that worketh by charity [[or but faith that worketh by charity]].
GAL 5:7 Ye ran well; who hindered you that ye obeyed not to the truth?
GAL 5:8 Consent ye to no man; for this counsel is not of him that hath called you.
GAL 5:9 A little sourdough impaireth [[or maketh sour]] all the gobbet.
GAL 5:10 I trust on you in our Lord, that ye should understand none other thing. And who that disturbeth or dis-troubleth you, shall bear doom, whoever he be.
GAL 5:11 And, brethren, if I preach yet circumcision, what suffer I yet persecution? then the stumbling of the cross is avoided/is voided.
GAL 5:12 I would that they were cut away, that disturb you. [[I would that they that distrouble you, be also cut off.]]
GAL 5:13 For, brethren, ye be called into freedom [[or into liberty]]; only give ye not freedom [[or liberty]] into occasion of flesh, but by charity of [[the]] Spirit serve ye together.
GAL 5:14 For every law [[or all the law]] is fulfilled in one word, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
GAL 5:15 And if ye bite, and eat each other, see ye, lest ye be wasted each from other.
GAL 5:16 And I say to you in Christ, walk ye in Spirit, and ye shall not perform the desires of the flesh.
GAL 5:17 For the flesh coveteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for these be adversaries together, that ye do not all things that ye will.
GAL 5:18 That if ye be led by [[the]] Spirit, ye be not under the law.
GAL 5:19 And the works of the flesh be open, which be fornication, unclean-ness, unchastity, lechery,
GAL 5:20 service of false gods [[or serving of idols]], witchcrafts, enmities, strivings [[or strives]], indignations, wraths, chidings, dissensions, sects [[or heresies]],
GAL 5:21 envies, manslayings, drunkennesses, unmeasurable eatings [[or gluttonies]], and things like to these, which I say to you before, as I have told to you before, for they that do such things, shall not have the kingdom of God.
GAL 5:22 But the fruit of the Spirit is charity, joy, peace, patience, long abiding, benignity, [[or good will]], goodness, mildness, faith,
GAL 5:23 temperance, continence, chastity; against such things is no law.
GAL 5:24 And they that be of Christ, have crucified their flesh with vices and covetings [[or concupiscences]].
GAL 5:25 If we live by Spirit, walk we by Spirit;
GAL 5:26 be we not made covetous of vain glory, stirring each other to wrath, or having envy each to other.
GAL 6:1 Brethren, if a man be occupied in any guilt [[or overcome in any trespass]], ye that be spiritual, inform ye [[or teach]] such one in spirit of softness, [[or meekness]], beholding thyself, lest that thou be tempted, [[falling in the same wise]].
GAL 6:2 Each bear other’s charges, and so ye shall fulfill the law of Christ.
GAL 6:3 For who that troweth [[or guesseth]] that he be aught, when he is nought, he beguileth himself.
GAL 6:4 But each man prove his own work, and so he shall have glory [[only]] in himself, and not in another.
GAL 6:5 For each man shall bear his own charge.
GAL 6:6 He that is taught in word, commune he with him that teacheth him, in all goods [[or in all good things]].
GAL 6:7 Do not ye err, God is not scorned; for those things that a man soweth, those things he shall reap.
GAL 6:8 For he that soweth in his flesh, of the flesh he shall reap corruption; but he that soweth in the Spirit, of the Spirit he shall reap everlasting life.
GAL 6:9 And doing good fail we not; for in his time we shall reap, not failing.
GAL 6:10 Therefore while we have time, work we good to all men; but most to them that be home-like [[or that be the household meine]] of the faith.
GAL 6:11 See ye, what manner letters I have written to you with mine own hand.
GAL 6:12 For whoever will please in the flesh, these constrain you to be circumcised, only that they suffer not the persecution of Christ’s cross.
GAL 6:13 For neither they that be circumcised keep the law; but they will, that they have glory in your flesh.
GAL 6:14 But far be it from me to have glory, [[no]] but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world.
GAL 6:15 For in Jesus Christ neither circum-cision is anything worth, nor prepuce, but a new creature.
GAL 6:16 And whoever [[shall]] pursue this rule, peace on them, and mercy, and on Israel of God.
GAL 6:17 And hereafter [[or From hence-forth]], no man be heavy to me; for I bear in my body the tokens, [[or the wounds]], of our Lord Jesus Christ.
GAL 6:18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brethren. Amen.
EPH 1:1 Paul, the apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, to all the saints that be at Ephesus, and to the faithful men in Jesus Christ,
EPH 1:2 grace be to you and peace of God, our Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ.
EPH 1:3 Blessed be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that hath blessed us in all spiritual blessing in heavenly things in Christ,
EPH 1:4 as he hath chosen us in himself before the making of the world, that we were holy [[or that we should be holy]], and without wem in his sight, in charity.
EPH 1:5 Which hath before-ordained us into [[the]] adoption of sons by Jesus Christ into him, by the purpose of his will,
EPH 1:6 into the praising of the glory of his grace; in which he hath glorified us [[or he made us able to his grace]] in his dearworthy Son.
EPH 1:7 In whom we have redemption by his blood, [[and]] forgiveness of sins, after the riches of his grace,
EPH 1:8 that abounded greatly in us in all wisdom and prudence,
EPH 1:9 to make known to us the sacrament of his will, by the good pleasance of him;
EPH 1:10 the which sacrament he purposed in him in the dispensation of plenty of times, to store up all things in Christ, which be in heavens, and which be in earth, in him.
EPH 1:11 In whom [[also]] we be called by lot, before-ordained by the purpose of him that worketh all things by the counsel of his will;
EPH 1:12 that we be into the praising of his glory, we that have hoped before [[or we that before hoped]] in Christ.
EPH 1:13 In whom also ye were called, when ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your health, in whom ye believing be marked with the Holy Ghost of promise,
EPH 1:14 which is the earnest [[or a wed]] of our heritage, into the redemption of purchasing, into [[the]] praising of his glory.
EPH 1:15 Therefore and I hearing your faith, that is in Christ Jesus, and the love into all saints,
EPH 1:16 cease not to do thankings for you, making mind of you in my prayers;
EPH 1:17 that God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give to you the spirit of wisdom and of revelation, into the knowing of him;
EPH 1:18 and the eyes of your heart enlightened, that ye know, which is the hope of his calling, and which be the riches of the glory of his heritage in saints;
EPH 1:19 and which is the excellent greatness of his virtue, into us that have believed, by the working of the might of his virtue,
EPH 1:20 which he wrought in Christ, raising him from death, and setting him on his right half in heavenly things,
EPH 1:21 above each principat, and potentate, and virtue, and domination, and above each name that is named, not only in this world, but also in the world to coming [[or to come]];
EPH 1:22 and made all things subject under his feet, and gave him to be head over all the church,
EPH 1:23 that is the body of him, and the plenty of him, which is all things in all things fulfilled.
EPH 2:1 And when ye were dead in your guilts and sins,
EPH 2:2 in which ye wandered sometime, after the course of this world, after the prince of the power of this air, of the spirit that worketh now into the sons of unbelief;
EPH 2:3 in which also we all lived sometime in the desires of our flesh, doing the wills of the flesh and of the thoughts, and we were by kind the sons of wrath, as other men;
EPH 2:4 but God, that is rich in mercy, for his full much charity in which he loved us,
EPH 2:5 yea, when we were dead in sins, quickened us together in Christ, by whose grace ye be saved,
EPH 2:6 and again-raised together, and made together to sit in heavenly things in Christ Jesus;
EPH 2:7 that he should show in the worlds above coming the plenteous riches of his grace in goodness on us in Christ Jesus.
EPH 2:8 For by grace ye be saved by faith, and this not of you; for it is the gift of God,
EPH 2:9 not of works, that no man have glory.
EPH 2:10 For we be the making of him, made of nought in Christ Jesus, in good works, which God hath ordained, that we go in those works.
EPH 2:11 For which thing be ye mindful that sometime ye were heathen in flesh, which were said prepuce, from that that is said circumcision made by hand in flesh;
EPH 2:12 and ye were in that time without Christ, alienated [[or strangers]] from the living of Israel, and guests of the testaments, not having hope of promise, and without God in this world.
EPH 2:13 But now in Christ Jesus ye that were sometime far, be made nigh in the blood of Christ.
EPH 2:14 For he is our peace, that made both one, and unbinding the middle wall of a wall without mortar,
EPH 2:15 enmities in his flesh; and voided the law of commandments by dooms, that he make two in himself into a new man, making peace,
EPH 2:16 to reconcile both in one body to God by the cross, slaying the enmities in himself.
EPH 2:17 And he coming preached peace to you that were far, and peace to them that were nigh;
EPH 2:18 for by him we both have nigh coming in one Spirit to the Father.
EPH 2:19 Therefore now ye be not guests and strangers, but ye be citizens of saints, and [[the]] household meine of God;
EPH 2:20 above builded on the founda-ment of apostles and of prophets, upon that highest cornerstone, Christ Jesus;
EPH 2:21 in whom each building made waxeth into an holy temple in the Lord.
EPH 2:22 In whom also ye be builded together into the habitation of God, in the Holy Ghost.
EPH 3:1 For the grace of this thing I, Paul, the bound of Christ Jesus, for you heathen men,
EPH 3:2 if nevertheless ye have heard the dispensation of God’s grace, that is given to me in you.
EPH 3:3 For by revelation the sacrament is made known to me, as I above wrote in short thing,
EPH 3:4 as ye may read, and understand my prudence in the mystery of Christ.
EPH 3:5 Which was not known to other generations to the sons of men, as it is now showed to his holy apostles and prophets in the Spirit,
EPH 3:6 that heathen men be even-heirs, and of one body, and partners together of his promise in Christ Jesus by the evangel;
EPH 3:7 whose minister I am made, by the gift of God’s grace, which is given to me by the working of his virtue.
EPH 3:8 To me, least of all saints, this grace is given to preach [[or to evangelize]] among heathen men the unsearchable riches of Christ,
EPH 3:9 and to enlighten all men, which is the dispensation of [[the]] sacrament hid from worlds in God, that made all things of nought;
EPH 3:10 that the much-fold wisdom of God be known to princes and potentates in heavenly things by the church,
EPH 3:11 by the before-ordinance [[or after the setting]] of worlds, which he made in Christ Jesus our Lord.
EPH 3:12 In whom we have trust and nigh coming [[to]], in trusting by the faith of him.
EPH 3:13 For which thing I ask, that ye fail not in my tribulations for you, which is your glory.
EPH 3:14 For grace of this thing I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
EPH 3:15 of whom each fatherhood in heavens [[or in heaven]] and in earth is named,
EPH 3:16 that he give to you, after the riches of his glory, virtue to be strengthened by his Spirit in the inner man,
EPH 3:17 that Christ dwell by faith in your hearts; that ye rooted and grounded in charity,
EPH 3:18 may comprehend with all saints, which is the breadth, and the length, and the highness, and the deepness;
EPH 3:19 also to know the charity of Christ more excellent than science, that ye be [[full]]-filled in all the plenty of God.
EPH 3:20 And to him that is mighty to do all things more plenteously than we ask or understand, by the virtue that worketh in us,
EPH 3:21 to him be glory in the church, and in Christ Jesus, into all the generations of the world[[s]] of worlds. Amen.
EPH 4:1 Therefore I bound for the Lord beseech you, that ye walk worthily in the calling, in which ye be called,
EPH 4:2 with all meekness and mildness, with patience supporting each other in charity,
EPH 4:3 busy to keep unity of Spirit in the bond of peace.
EPH 4:4 One body and one Spirit, as ye be called in one hope of your calling;
EPH 4:5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
EPH 4:6 one God and Father of all, which is above all men, and by all things, and in us all.
EPH 4:7 But to each of us grace is given by [[or after]] the measure of the giving of Christ;
EPH 4:8 for which thing he saith, He ascending on high, led captivity captive, he gave gifts to men.
EPH 4:9 But what is it, that he went up [[or ascended]], no but that also he came down first into the lower parts of the earth?
EPH 4:10 He it is that came down, and that ascended [[or went up]] on all heavens, that he should fill all things.
EPH 4:11 And he gave some apostles, some prophets, others evangelists, others shepherds and teachers,
EPH 4:12 to the full ending of saints, into the work of ministry, into [[the]] edification of Christ’s body,
EPH 4:13 till we run all, into [[or in]] unity of faith and of knowing of God’s Son, into a perfect man, after the measure of the age of the plenty of Christ;
EPH 4:14 that we be not now little children, moving as waves, and be not borne about with each wind of teaching, in the waywardness of men, in subtle wit, to the deceiving of error.
EPH 4:15 But do we truth in charity, and wax in him by all things, that is Christ our head;
EPH 4:16 of whom all the body set together, and bound together by each jointure of under-serving, by working into the measure of each member, maketh increasing of the body, into [[the]] edification of itself in charity.
EPH 4:17 Therefore I say and witness this thing in the Lord, that ye walk not now, as heathen men walk, in the vanity of their wit;
EPH 4:18 that have understanding darkened with darknesses, and be alienated [[or made far]] from the life of God, by ignorance that is in them, for the blindness of their heart.
EPH 4:19 Which despairing betook them-selves to unchastity, into the working of all uncleanness in covetousness.
EPH 4:20 But ye have not so learned Christ,
EPH 4:21 if nevertheless ye heard him, and be taught in him, as is truth in Jesus.
EPH 4:22 Do ye away by the old living [[or after the first living]], the old man, that is corrupt by the desires of error;
EPH 4:23 and be ye renewed [[or made new again]] in the spirit of your soul;
EPH 4:24 and clothe ye the new man, which is made after God in rightwiseness and holiness of truth.
EPH 4:25 For which thing put ye away leasing, and speak ye truth each man with his neighbour, for we be members each to other [[or together]].
EPH 4:26 Be ye wroth, and do not do sin [[or do not ye sin]]; the sun fall not down on your wrath.
EPH 4:27 Do not ye give stead to the devil.
EPH 4:28 He that stole, now steal he not; but more rather travail he in working with his hands that that is good, that he have whereof he shall give to the needy.
EPH 4:29 Each evil word go not out of your mouth; but if any is good to the edification of faith, that it give grace to men that hear.
EPH 4:30 And do not ye make the Holy Ghost of God sorry, [[or heavy]], in which ye be marked in the day of redemption.
EPH 4:31 All bitterness, and wrath, and indignation, and cry, and blasphemy be taken away from you, with all malice;
EPH 4:32 and be ye together benign, [[or of good will]], merciful, forgiving together, as also God forgave to you in Christ.
EPH 5:1 Therefore be ye followers of God, as most dearworthy sons;
EPH 5:2 and walk ye in love, as Christ loved us, and gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God, into the odour of sweetness.
EPH 5:3 And fornication, and all unclean-ness, or avarice, be not named among you, as it becometh holy men;
EPH 5:4 either filth, or folly speech, or buffoonery [[or harlotry]], that pertaineth not to profit, but more rather doing of thankings.
EPH 5:5 For know ye this, and understand, that each lecher [[or each fornicator]], or unclean man, or covetous [[man]], that serveth to maumets [[or to idols]], hath not heritage in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
EPH 5:6 No man deceive you by vain words; for why for these things the wrath of God came upon the sons of unbelief.
EPH 5:7 Therefore do not ye be made partners of them.
EPH 5:8 For ye were sometime darknesses, but now ye be light in the Lord. Walk ye as the sons of light.
EPH 5:9 For the fruit of light is in all goodness, and rightwiseness, and truth.
EPH 5:10 And prove ye what thing is well pleasing to God.
EPH 5:11 And do not ye commune to unfruiteous works of darknesses; but more rather reprove ye [[them]].
EPH 5:12 For what things be done of them in privy, it is foul, yea, to speak.
EPH 5:13 And all things that be reproved of the light, be openly showed [[or be made open]]; for all thing that is showed, is light.
EPH 5:14 For which thing he saith, Rise thou that sleepest, and rise up from death, and Christ shall lighten [[or illumine]] thee.
EPH 5:15 Therefore, brethren, see ye, how warily ye shall go; not as unwise men, but as wise men,
EPH 5:16 again-buying the time, for the days be evil.
EPH 5:17 Therefore do not ye be made unwise, but understanding which is the will of God [[or of the Lord]].
EPH 5:18 And do not ye be drunk of wine, in which is lechery [[or is luxury]], but be ye filled with the Holy Ghost;
EPH 5:19 and speak ye to yourselves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and saying psalm in your hearts to the Lord;
EPH 5:20 evermore doing thankings for all things, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God and to the Father.
EPH 5:21 Be ye subject together in the dread of Christ.
EPH 5:22 Women, be they subject to their husbands, as to the Lord,
EPH 5:23 for the man is head of the woman, as Christ is head of the church; he is Saviour of his body.
EPH 5:24 But as the church is subject to Christ, so women to their husbands in all things.
EPH 5:25 Men, love ye your wives, as Christ loved the church, and gave himself for it,
EPH 5:26 to make it holy; and cleansed it with the washing of water, in the word of life,
EPH 5:27 to give the church glorious to himself, that it had no wem, [[or spot]], nor rivelling [[or wrinkle]], or any such thing, but that it be holy and undefouled.
EPH 5:28 So and men shall love their wives, as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife, loveth himself;
EPH 5:29 for no man hated ever his own flesh, but nourisheth and fostereth it, as Christ doeth the church.
EPH 5:30 And we be members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.
EPH 5:31 For this thing a man shall forsake his father and mother, and he shall draw [[or he shall cleave]] to his wife; and they shall be twain in one flesh.
EPH 5:32 This sacrament is great; yea, I say in Christ, and in the church.
EPH 5:33 Nevertheless ye all, each man love his wife as himself; and the wife dread her husband.
EPH 6:1 Sons, obey ye to your father and mother, in the Lord; for this thing is rightful [[or is just]].
EPH 6:2 Honour thou thy father and mother, that is the first commandment in [[the]] promise;
EPH 6:3 that it be well to thee, and that thou be long living on the earth.
EPH 6:4 And, fathers, do not ye provoke your sons to wrath; but nourish ye them in the teaching and chastising [[or in the discipline and correction]] of the Lord.
EPH 6:5 Servants, obey ye to fleshly lords with dread and trembling, in simple-ness of your heart, as to Christ;
EPH 6:6 not serving at the eye, as pleasing to men, but as servants of Christ; doing the will of God by discretion,
EPH 6:7 with good will serving as to the Lord, and not as to men;
EPH 6:8 witting that each man, whatever good thing he shall do, he shall receive this of the Lord, whether servant, whether free man.
EPH 6:9 And, ye lords, do the same things to them, forgiving menacings; witting that both their Lord and yours is in heavens, and the taking of persons is not with God.
EPH 6:10 Here afterward, brethren, be ye comforted in the Lord, and in the might of his virtue.
EPH 6:11 Clothe you with the armour of God, that ye may stand against the ambushings, [[or assailings]], of the devil.
EPH 6:12 For why striving [[or battle]] is not to us against flesh and blood, but against [[the]] princes and potentates, against governors of the world of these darknesses, against spiritual things of wickedness, in heavenly things.
EPH 6:13 Therefore take ye the armour of God, that ye may against-stand in the evil day; and in all things stand perfect.
EPH 6:14 Therefore stand ye, and be girded about your loins in soothfastness, and clothed with the habergeon of rightwiseness,
EPH 6:15 and your feet shod in making ready of the gospel of peace.
EPH 6:16 In all things take ye the shield of faith, in which ye may quench all the fiery darts of him that is most wicked or the worst.
EPH 6:17 And take ye the helmet of health, and the sword of the Ghost, that is, the word of God.
EPH 6:18 By all prayer and beseeching pray ye all time in Spirit, and in him waking in all busyness, and beseeching for all holy men [[or for all saints]].
EPH 6:19 and for me; that word be given to me in opening of my mouth, with trust to make known the mystery of the gospel,
EPH 6:20 for which I am set in message in a chain; so that in it I be hardy to speak, as it behooveth me [[to speak out]].
EPH 6:21 And [[that]] ye know, what things be about me, what I do, Tychicus, my most dear brother, and true minister in the Lord, shall make all things known to you;
EPH 6:22 whom I sent to you for this same thing, that ye know what things be about us, and that he comfort your hearts.
EPH 6:23 Peace to brethren, and charity, with faith of God our Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
EPH 6:24 Grace with all men that love our Lord Jesus Christ in uncorruption. Amen, that is, So be it.
1TH 1:1 Paul, and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the church of Thessalonians, in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, grace and peace to you.
1TH 1:2 We do thankings to God ever-more for all you, and we make mind of you in our prayers without ceasing;
1TH 1:3 having mind [[or mindful]] of the work of your faith, and travail, and charity, and abiding of the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ, before God and our Father.
1TH 1:4 Ye beloved brethren of God, we witting you’re choosing,
1TH 1:5 for our gospel was not at you in word only, but also in virtue, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much plenty; as ye know, which we were among you for you;
1TH 1:6 and ye be made followers of us, and of the Lord, receiving the word in much tribulation, with joy of the Holy Ghost;
1TH 1:7 so that ye be made ensample to all men that believe, in Macedonia and in Achaia.
1TH 1:8 For of you the word of the Lord is published [[or is much told]], not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but your faith that is to God, in each place is gone forth, [[or but in each place your faith that is to God, is gone forth]]; so that it is not need to us to speak anything.
1TH 1:9 For they show of you, what manner entry we had to you, and how ye be converted to God from maumets [[or from simulacra]], to serve to the living God and very;
1TH 1:10 and to abide his Son from heavens, whom he raised from death, the Lord Jesus, that delivered us from wrath to coming [[or to come]].
1TH 2:1 For, brethren, ye know our entry to you, for it was not vain;
1TH 2:2 but first we suffered, and were punished with wrongs, as ye know in Philippi, and had trust in our Lord, to speak to you the gospel of God in much busyness.
1TH 2:3 And our exhortation [[or our teaching]] is not of error, neither of uncleanness, neither in guile,
1TH 2:4 but as we be approved of God, that the gospel of God should be taken to us, so we speak; not as pleasing to men, but to God that proveth our hearts.
1TH 2:5 For neither we were any time in word of glossing [[or of flattering]], as ye know, neither in occasion of avarice; God is witness;
1TH 2:6 neither seeking glory of men, neither of you, neither of others, when we, as Christ’s apostles, might have been in charge [[or chargeous]] to you.
1TH 2:7 But we were made little in the middle of you, as if a nurse foster her sons;
1TH 2:8 so we desiring you with great love, would have betaken to you not only the gospel of God, but also our lives, for ye be made most dear-worthy to us.
1TH 2:9 For, brethren, ye be mindful of our travail and weariness; we worked night and day, that we should not grieve any of you, and preached to you the gospel of God.
1TH 2:10 God and ye be witnesses, how holily, and justly, and without complaint [[or quarrel]], we were to you that believed.
1TH 2:11 As ye know, how we prayed you, and comforted each of you, as the father his sons,
1TH 2:12 and we have witnessed, that ye should go worthily to God, that called you into his kingdom and glory.
1TH 2:13 Therefore we do thankings to God without ceasing. For when ye had taken of us the word of the hearing of God, ye took it not as the word of men, but as it is verily, the word of God, that worketh in you that have believed.
1TH 2:14 For, brethren, ye be made followers of the churches of God, that be in Judea, in Christ Jesus, for ye have suffered the same things of your even-lineages, as they of the Jews.
1TH 2:15 Which slew both the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and pursued us, and they please not to God, and they be adversaries to all men;
1TH 2:16 forbidding us to speak to heathen men, that they be made safe, that they [[full]]-fill their sins evermore; for the wrath of God came on them into the end.
1TH 2:17 And, brethren, we desolate from you for a time, by mouth and in beholding, [[as in presence]], but not in heart, have hied more plenteously to see your face with great desire.
1TH 2:18 For we would come to you, yea, I, Paul, once and again, but Satan hindered us.
1TH 2:19 For why what is our hope, or joy, or crown of glory? Whether ye be not before our Lord Jesus Christ in his coming?
1TH 2:20 For ye be our glory and joy.
1TH 3:1 For which thing we suffered no longer, and it pleased to us to dwell alone at Athens;
1TH 3:2 and we sent Timothy, our brother, and minister of God in the evangel of Christ, to you to be confirmed, and to be taught, [[or admonished]], for your faith,
1TH 3:3 that no man be moved in these tribulations. For [[ye]] yourselves know, that in this thing we be set.
1TH 3:4 For when we were at you, we before-said to you, that we should suffer tribulations; as it is done, and ye know.
1TH 3:5 Therefore I, Paul, no longer abiding, sent to know your faith, lest peradventure he that tempteth [[shall]] tempt you, and your travail [[or our travail]] be made vain.
1TH 3:6 But now, when Timothy shall come to us from you, and tell to us your faith and charity, and that ye have good mind of us, ever[[more]] desiring to see us, as we also you;
1TH 3:7 therefore, brethren, we be comforted in you, in all our need and tribulation, by your faith.
1TH 3:8 For now we live, if ye stand in the Lord.
1TH 3:9 For what doing of thankings may we yield to God for you, in all joy, in which we joy for you before our Lord?
1TH 3:10 night and day more plenteously praying, that we see your face, and fulfill those things that fail to [[or of]] your faith.
1TH 3:11 But God himself and our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, address our way to you.
1TH 3:12 And the Lord multiply you, and make your charity to be plenteous of each to other [[or for to abound together]], and into all men, as also we in you;
1TH 3:13 that your hearts be confirmed without complaint in holiness, before God and our Father, in the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints. Amen.
1TH 4:1 Therefore, brethren, from hence-forward we pray you, and beseech in the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us, how it behooveth you to go and to please God, so walk ye, that ye abound more.
1TH 4:2 For ye know what commandments I have given to you by the Lord Jesus.
1TH 4:3 For this is the will of God, your holiness, that ye abstain you from fornication.
1TH 4:4 That each of you know how to wield his vessel in holiness, and honour;
1TH 4:5 not in passion of lust, as heathen men that know not God.
1TH 4:6 And that no man over-go, neither deceive his brother, in chaffering. For the Lord is avenger of all these things, as we before-said to you, and have witnessed.
1TH 4:7 For God called not us into uncleanness, but into holiness.
1TH 4:8 Therefore he that despiseth these things, despiseth not man, but God, that also gave his Holy Spirit in us.
1TH 4:9 But of the charity of brotherhood, we had no need to write to you; ye yourselves have learned of God, that ye love together;
1TH 4:10 for ye do that into all brethren in all Macedonia. And, brethren, we pray you, that ye abound more;
1TH 4:11 and take keep, [[or and give work, or busyness]], that ye be quiet; and that ye do your need, and that ye work with your [[own]] hands, as we have commanded to you;
1TH 4:12 and that ye wander honestly to them that be withoutforth, and that of no man ye desire anything.
1TH 4:13 For, brethren, we will not, that ye unknow of men that die, that ye be not sorrowful, as others that have not hope.
1TH 4:14 For if we believe, that Jesus was dead, and rose again, so God shall lead with him them that be dead by Jesus.
1TH 4:15 And we say this thing to you in the word of the Lord, that we that live, that be left in the coming of the Lord, shall not come before them that be dead.
1TH 4:16 For the Lord himself shall come down from heaven, in the command-ment [[or in the commanding]], and in the voice of an archangel, and in the trump of God; and the dead men that be in Christ, shall rise again first.
1TH 4:17 Afterward we that live, that be left, shall be ravished together with them in clouds, meeting Christ in the air; and so evermore we shall be with the Lord.
1TH 4:18 Therefore be ye comforted together in these words.
1TH 5:1 But, brethren, of times and moments ye need not that I write to you.
1TH 5:2 For ye yourselves know diligently, that the day of the Lord shall come, as a thief in the night.
1TH 5:3 For when they shall say peace is, and secureness, then sudden death [[or suddenly perishing]] shall come on them, as sorrow to a woman that is with child, and they shall not escape.
1TH 5:4 But, brethren, ye be not in darknesses, that that day as a thief catch you.
1TH 5:5 For all ye be the sons of light, and sons of [[the]] day; we be not of night, neither of darknesses.
1TH 5:6 Therefore sleep we not as others; but wake we, and be we sober.
1TH 5:7 For they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be drunken, be drunken in the night.
1TH 5:8 But we that be of the day, be sober, clothed in the habergeon of faith and of charity, and in the helmet of hope of health.
1TH 5:9 For God putted not us into wrath, but into the purchasing of health, by our Lord Jesus Christ,
1TH 5:10 that was dead for us; that whether we wake, whether we sleep, we live together with him.
1TH 5:11 For which thing comfort ye together, and edify ye each other, as ye do.
1TH 5:12 And, brethren, we pray you, that ye know them that travail among you, and be sovereigns [[or be before]] to you in the Lord, and teach you,
1TH 5:13 that ye have them more abun-dantly in charity; and for the work of them, have ye peace with them.
1TH 5:14 And, brethren, we pray you, reprove, [[or chastise]], unpeaceable [[or unquiet]] men. Comfort ye men of little heart, receive ye sick men, be ye patient to all men.
1TH 5:15 See ye, that no man yield evil for evil to any man; but evermore pursue ye that that is good, each to other, and to all men.
1TH 5:16 Evermore joy ye;
1TH 5:17 without ceasing pray ye;
1TH 5:18 in all things do ye thankings. For this is the will of God in Christ Jesus, in all you.
1TH 5:19 Do not ye quench the Spirit,
1TH 5:20 do not ye despise prophecies.
1TH 5:21 But prove ye all things, and hold ye that thing that is good.
1TH 5:22 Abstain [[ye]] you from all evil species, [[or likeness]].
1TH 5:23 And God himself of peace make you holy by all things, that your spirit be kept whole, and soul, and body, without complaint, in the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1TH 5:24 God is true, that called you, which also shall do [[work of grace in you]].
1TH 5:25 Brethren, pray ye for us.
1TH 5:26 Greet ye well all brethren in holy kiss.
1TH 5:27 I charge you by the Lord, that this epistle be read to all holy brethren.
1TH 5:28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.
1TI 1:1 Paul, [[the]] apostle of Jesus Christ, by the commandment of God our Saviour, and of Jesus Christ our hope,
1TI 1:2 to Timothy, beloved son in the faith, grace and mercy and peace, of God the Father, and of Jesus Christ, our Lord.
1TI 1:3 As I prayed thee, that thou shouldest dwell at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou shouldest command to some men, that they should not teach other way,
1TI 1:4 neither give attention to fables and genealogies that be uncertain [[or without end]], which give questions, more than edification of God, that is in the faith.
1TI 1:5 For the end of the commandment is charity of clean heart, and good conscience, and of faith not feigned.
1TI 1:6 From which things some men have erred, and be turned into vain speech;
1TI 1:7 and will to be teachers of the law, and understand not what things they speak, neither of what things they affirm.
1TI 1:8 And we know that the law is good, if any man use it lawfully;
1TI 1:9 and witting this thing, that the law is not set [[or not put]] to a just man, but to unjust men and not subject, to wicked men and to sinners, to cursed men and defouled, to slayers of father, and slayers of mother, to manslayers
1TI 1:10 and lechers, to them that do lechery with men, [[or and fornicators, to them that trespass with males against kind, sellers, or stealers, of men]], leasing-mongers and forsworn, and if any other thing is contrary to the wholesome teaching,
1TI 1:11 that is after the gospel of the glory of blessed God, which is betaken to me.
1TI 1:12 I do thankings to him, that comforted me in Christ Jesus our Lord, for he guessed me faithful, and put me in ministry,
1TI 1:13 that first was a blasphemer, and a pursuer, and full of wrongs. But I have gotten the mercy of God, for I unknowing did in unbelief.
1TI 1:14 But the grace of our Lord over-abounded, with faith and love that is in Christ Jesus.
1TI 1:15 A true word and worthy all receiving, for Christ Jesus came into this world to make sinful men safe, of which I am the first.
1TI 1:16 But therefore I have gotten mercy, that Christ Jesus should show in me first all patience, to the informing of them that shall believe to him into everlasting life.
1TI 1:17 And to the king of worlds, undeadly, and invisible God alone, be honour and glory into worlds of worlds. Amen.
1TI 1:18 I betake this commandment to thee, thou son Timothy, after the prophecies that have been heretofore in thee, that thou travail [[or fight]] in them a good travail,
1TI 1:19 having faith and good conscience, which some men cast away, and perished about the faith.
1TI 1:20 Of which is Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I betook to Satan, that they learn not to blaspheme.
1TI 2:1 Therefore I beseech first of all things, that beseechings, prayers, askings, doing of thankings, be made for all men,
1TI 2:2 for kings and all that be set in highness, that we lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all piety and chastity.
1TI 2:3 For this thing is good and accepted before God, our Saviour,
1TI 2:4 that will that all men be made safe, and that they come to the knowing of truth.
1TI 2:5 For one God and one mediator is of God and of men, a man Christ Jesus,
1TI 2:6 that gave himself redemption for all men. Whose witnessing is confirmed in his times;
1TI 2:7 in which I am set a preacher and an apostle. For I say truth [[in Christ Jesus]], and I lie not, that am a teacher of heathen men in faith and in truth.
1TI 2:8 Therefore I will, that men pray in all place, lifting up clean hands without wrath and strife [[or disputing]].
1TI 2:9 Also women in suitable habit, with shamefastness and soberness arraying themselves, not in wreathed hairs, either in gold, or pearls, or precious clothes;
1TI 2:10 but that that becometh women, promising piety by good works.
1TI 2:11 A woman learn in silence, with all subjection.
1TI 2:12 But I suffer not a woman to teach, neither to have lordship on the husband [[or on the man]], but to be in silence.
1TI 2:13 For Adam was first formed, afterward Eve;
1TI 2:14 and Adam was not deceived, but the woman was deceived, in breaking of the law [[or prevarication]].
1TI 2:15 But she shall be saved by generation of children, if she dwell perfectly in faith, and love, and holiness, with soberness.
1TI 3:1 A faithful word [[I shall say]]. If any man desireth a bishopric, he desireth a good work.
1TI 3:2 Therefore it behooveth a bishop to be without reproof, the husband of one wife, sober, prudent, chaste, virtuous, holding hospitality, a teacher;
1TI 3:3 not given much to wine, not a smiter, but temperate [[or patient]], not full of chiding [[or strife]], not covetous,
1TI 3:4 well-ruling his house, and have sons subject with all chastity;
1TI 3:5 for if any man know not how to govern his house, how shall he have diligence [[or the keeping]] of the church of God?
1TI 3:6 not new converted to the faith, lest he be borne up into pride, and fall into [[the]] doom of the devil.
1TI 3:7 For it behooveth him to have also good witnessing of them that be with-outforth, that he fall not into reproof, and into the snare of the devil.
1TI 3:8 Also it behooveth deacons to be chaste, not double-tongued, not given much to wine [[or not given to much wine]], not following foul winning;
1TI 3:9 that have the mystery of faith in clean conscience.
1TI 3:10 But be they proved first, and minister they so, having no crime, [[or great sin]].
1TI 3:11 Also it behooveth women to be chaste, not backbiting, sober, faithful in all things.
1TI 3:12 Deacons be husbands of one wife; which govern well their sons and their houses.
1TI 3:13 For they that minister well, shall get a good degree to themselves, and much trust in the faith, that is in Christ Jesus.
1TI 3:14 Son Timothy, I write to thee these things, hoping that I shall come soon to thee;
1TI 3:15 but if I tarry, that thou knowest, how it behooveth thee to live in the house of God, that is the church of living God, a pillar and firmness of truth.
1TI 3:16 And openly it is a great sacrament of piety, that thing that was showed in flesh, it is justified in Spirit, it appeared to angels, it is preached to heathen men, it is believed in the world, it is taken up into glory.
1TI 4:1 But the Spirit saith openly, that in the last times some men shall depart from the faith, giving attention to spirits of error, and to teachings of devils;
1TI 4:2 that speak leasing in hypocrisy, and have their conscience corrupted,
1TI 4:3 forbidding to be wedded, and to abstain from meats, which God made to take with doing of thankings, to faithful men, and them that have known the truth.
1TI 4:4 For each creature of God is good, and nothing is to be cast away, which is taken with doing of thankings;
1TI 4:5 for it is hallowed by the word of God, and by prayer.
1TI 4:6 Thou putting forth these things to brethren, shalt be a good minister of Christ Jesus; nourished with words of faith and of good doctrine, which thou hast gotten.
1TI 4:7 But eschew [[or shun]] thou uncovenable fables, and old women’s fables; haunt thyself to piety.
1TI 4:8 For bodily exercitation is profitable to little thing; but piety is profitable to all things, that hath a promise of life that now is, and that is to come.
1TI 4:9 A true word, and worthy all acceptation or acception.
1TI 4:10 And in this thing we travail, and be cursed, for we hope in living God, that is Saviour of all men, most of faithful men.
1TI 4:11 Command thou this thing, and teach.
1TI 4:12 No man despise thy youth, but be thou ensample of faithful men, in word, in living, in charity, in faith, in chastity.
1TI 4:13 Till I come, take attention to reading, to exhortation and teaching.
1TI 4:14 Do not thou little care, the grace which is in thee, that is given to thee by prophecy, with putting on of the hands of [[the]] priesthood.
1TI 4:15 Think thou these things, in these be thou, that thy profiting be showed to all men.
1TI 4:16 Take attention to thyself and to doctrine; be busy in them. For thou doing these things, shalt make both thyself safe, and them that hear thee.
1TI 5:1 Blame thou not an elder man, but beseech [[him]] as a father, young men as brethren;
1TI 5:2 old women as mothers, young women as sisters, in all chastity.
1TI 5:3 Honour thou [[the]] widows, that be very widows.
1TI 5:4 But if any widow hath children of sons, learn she first to govern her house, and requite to father and mother; for this thing is accepted before God.
1TI 5:5 And she that is a widow verily, and desolate, hope [[she]] into God, and be busy in beseechings and prayers night and day.
1TI 5:6 For she that is living in delights, is dead [[in soul]].
1TI 5:7 And command thou this thing, that they be without reproof.
1TI 5:8 For if any man hath not care of his own, and mostly of his household men or meine, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an unfaithful, [[or heathen]], man.
1TI 5:9 A widow be chosen [[into the temple]] not less than sixty years, that was wife of one husband,
1TI 5:10 and hath witnessing in good works, if she nourished children, if she re-ceived poor men to harbour, if she hath washed the feet of holy men, if she ministered to men that suffered trib-ulation, if she followed all good work.
1TI 5:11 But eschew thou younger widows; for when they have done lechery, they will be wedded in Christ, [[or when they have done lechery in Christ, they will be wedded]],
1TI 5:12 having damnation, for they have made void the first faith.
1TI 5:13 Also they idle learn to go about houses, not only idle, but [[they be]] full of words and curious [[or curiosity]], speaking things that it behooveth not.
1TI 5:14 Therefore I will, that younger widows be wedded, and bring forth children, and be housewives, to give none occasion to the adversary, because of cursed thing.
1TI 5:15 For now some be turned aback after Satan.
1TI 5:16 If any faithful man hath widows, minister he to them, that the church be not charged, that it suffice to them that be very widows.
1TI 5:17 The priests that be well governors, [[that is, truly keep well priesthood]], be they had worthy to double honour; most they that travail in word and teaching.
1TI 5:18 For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not bridle the mouth of the ox threshing, and, A workman is worthy his hire.
1TI 5:19 Do not thou receive accusing against a priest, but under twain or three witnesses.
1TI 5:20 But reprove thou men that sin before all men, that also others have dread.
1TI 5:21 I pray [[or I adjure]] thee before God, and Jesus Christ, and his chosen angels, that thou keep these things without prejudice, and do nothing in bowing to the other side.
1TI 5:22 Put thou hands to no man, neither anon commune thou with other men’s sins. Keep thyself chaste. [[Put thou hands to no man soon, neither commune thou with other men’s sins. Keep thyself chaste.]]
1TI 5:23 Do not thou yet drink water, but use a little wine, for thy stomach, and for thine oft-falling infirmities.
1TI 5:24 Some men’s sins be open, before going to doom; but of some men they come after [[or they follow]].
1TI 5:25 And also good deeds be open, and those that have them in other manner, may not be hid.
1TI 6:1 Whatever servants be under yoke, deem they their lords worthy all honour, lest the name of the Lord and the doctrine [[or his doctrine]] be blasphemed.
1TI 6:2 And they that have faithful, [[or christian]], lords, despise them not, for they be brethren; but more serve they [[them]], for they be faithful and loved, which be partners of beneficence, [[or good doing]]. Teach thou these things, and admonish thou these things.
1TI 6:3 If any man teach otherwise, and accordeth not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to that teaching that is by piety,
1TI 6:4 he is proud, and knoweth nothing, but languisheth about questions and strivings [[or fightings]] of words, of the which be brought forth envies, strives, blasphemies, evil suspicions,
1TI 6:5 fightings of men, that be corrupt in soul [[or in reason]], and that be deprived from truth, that deem winning to be piety.
1TI 6:6 But a great winning is piety, with sufficience.
1TI 6:7 For we brought in nothing into this world, and no doubt, that we may not bear anything away.
1TI 6:8 But we having foods, and with what things we shall be covered [[or clothed]], be we satisfied with these things.
1TI 6:9 For they that will be made rich, fall into temptation, and into the snare of the devil, and into many unprofitable desires and noxious, which drown men into death and perdition.
1TI 6:10 For the root of all evils is covetousness, which some men coveting erred from the faith, and besetted them with many sorrows.
1TI 6:11 But, thou, man of God, flee these things; but follow thou rightwiseness, piety, faith, charity, patience, mildness.
1TI 6:12 Strive thou a good strife of faith, catch everlasting life, into which thou art called, and hast acknowledged a good acknowledging before many witnesses.
1TI 6:13 I command to thee before God, that quickeneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, that yielded a witnessing under Pilate of Pontii, a good confession,
1TI 6:14 that thou keep the commandment without wem, without reproof, into the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ;
1TI 6:15 whom the blessed and alone almighty King of kings and Lord of lords shall show in his times.
1TI 6:16 Which alone hath undeadliness [[or immortality]], and dwelleth in light, to which light no man may come; whom no man saw, neither may see; to whom glory, and honour, and empire be without end. Amen.
1TI 6:17 Command thou to the rich men of this world, that they understand not highly [[or proudly]], neither that they hope in uncertainty of riches, but in the living God, that giveth to us all things plenteously to use;
1TI 6:18 to do well, to be made rich in good works, lightly to give, to commune,
1TI 6:19 to treasure to themselves a good foundament, into time to coming [[or time to come]], that they catch everlasting life.
1TI 6:20 Thou Timothy, keep the thing [[or the deposit]] betaken to thee, eschew-ing cursed novelties of voices, and opinions of false name of knowing;
1TI 6:21 which some men promising, about the faith fell down [[or fell down about the faith]]. The grace of God be with thee. Amen.
2TI 1:1 Paul, [[the]] apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, by the promise of life that is in Christ Jesus,
2TI 1:2 to Timothy, his most dearworthy son, grace, mercy, and peace of God the Father, and of Jesus Christ, our Lord.
2TI 1:3 I do thankings to my God, to whom I serve from my progenitors [[or my ancestors]], in clean conscience, that without ceasing I have mind of thee in my prayers, night and day,
2TI 1:4 desiring to see thee; having mind of thy tears, [[or mindful of thy tears]], that I be [[ful]] filled with joy.
2TI 1:5 And I bethink of that faith, that is in thee not feigned, which also dwelled first in thine aunt Lois, and in thy mother Eunice. And I am certain, that also in thee.
2TI 1:6 For which cause I admonish thee, that thou raise again the grace of God, that is in thee by the setting on [[or the on-putting]] of mine hands.
2TI 1:7 For why God gave not to us the spirit of dread, but of virtue, and of love, and of soberness.
2TI 1:8 Therefore do not thou shame the witnessing of our Lord Jesus Christ, neither me, his prisoner; but travail thou together in the gospel by the virtue of God;
2TI 1:9 that delivered us, and called with his holy calling, not after our works, but by his purpose and grace, that is given [[to us]] in Christ Jesus before worldly times;
2TI 1:10 but now it is open by the lightening of our Saviour Jesus Christ, which destroyed death, and lightened life and uncorruption by the gospel.
2TI 1:11 In which I am set a preacher and apostle, and master of heathen men.
2TI 1:12 For which cause also I suffer these things; but I am not confound-ed. For I know to whom I have believed, and I am certain that he is mighty to keep that is taken to my keeping, into that day.
2TI 1:13 Have thou the form of whole-some words, which thou heardest of me in faith and love in Christ Jesus.
2TI 1:14 Keep thou the good [[deposit, or thing]], taken to thy keeping by the Holy Ghost, that dwelleth in us.
2TI 1:15 Thou knowest this, that all that be in Asia be turned away from me, of which is Phygellus and Hermogenes.
2TI 1:16 The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for oft he refreshed me, and shamed not my chain.
2TI 1:17 But when he came to Rome, he sought me busily, and found [[me]].
2TI 1:18 The Lord give to him to find mercy of God in that day. And how great things he ministered to me at Ephesus, thou knowest better.
2TI 2:1 Therefore thou, my son, be comforted in grace that is in Christ Jesus.
2TI 2:2 And what things thou hast heard of me by many witnesses, betake thou these to faithful men, which shall be able also to teach other men.
2TI 2:3 Travail thou as a good knight of Christ Jesus.
2TI 2:4 No man holding knighthood to God, [[en]] wrappeth himself with worldly needs, that he please to him, to whom he hath proved himself.
2TI 2:5 For he that fighteth in a battle, shall not be crowned, but he fight lawfully.
2TI 2:6 It behooveth an earth-tiller to receive first of the fruits.
2TI 2:7 Understand thou what things I say. For the Lord shall give to thee understanding in all things.
2TI 2:8 Be thou mindful that the Lord Jesus Christ of the seed of David hath risen again from death, after my gospel,
2TI 2:9 in which I travail unto bonds, as working evil, but the word of God is not bound.
2TI 2:10 Therefore I suffer [[or I sustain]] all things for the chosen, that also they get the health that is in Christ Jesus, with heavenly glory.
2TI 2:11 A true word [[is this that I say]], that if we be dead together [[to the world]], also we shall live together [[in bliss]];
2TI 2:12 if we suffer [[or if we sustain]], we shall reign together [[with Christ]]; if we deny [[him]], he shall deny us;
2TI 2:13 if we believe not, he dwelleth faithful, he may not deny himself.
2TI 2:14 Teach thou these things, witness-ing before God. Do not thou strive in words; for to nothing it is profitable, but to the subverting of men that hear.
2TI 2:15 Busily keep [[or Take care]] to give thyself a proved, praiseable workman to God, without shame, rightly treating the word of truth.
2TI 2:16 But eschew thou [[or shun thou]] unholy and vain speeches, for why those profit much to unfaithfulness,
2TI 2:17 and the word of them creepeth as a canker. Of whom Philetus is, and Hymenaeus,
2TI 2:18 which felled down from the truth, saying that the rising-again is now done, and they subverted [[or turned upside-down]] the faith of some men.
2TI 2:19 But the firm foundament of God standeth, having this mark, The Lord knoweth which be his, and, Each man that nameth the name of the Lord, departeth from wickedness.
2TI 2:20 But in a great house be not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of tree, and of earth; and so some be into honour, and some into despite.
2TI 2:21 Therefore, if any man cleanseth himself from these, he shall be a vessel hallowed into honour, and profitable to the Lord, ready to all good work.
2TI 2:22 And flee thou [[the]] desires of youth, but follow thou rightwiseness, faith, charity, peace, with them that inwardly call [[or that in-call]] the Lord of a clean heart.
2TI 2:23 And eschew thou [[or shun]] foolish questions, and without knowing, [[or discipline]], witting that those engender chidings.
2TI 2:24 But it behooveth the servant of the Lord to chide not; but to be mild to all men, able to teach, patient,
2TI 2:25 with temperance reproving them that against-stand the truth, that some-time God give to them repenting [[or penance]], that they know the truth,
2TI 2:26 and that they rise again from the snares of the devil, of whom they be held prisoners at his will.
2TI 3:1 But know thou this thing, that in the last days perilous times shall nigh,
2TI 3:2 and men shall be loving them-selves, covetous, high of bearing, proud, blasphemers, not obedient to father and mother, unkind, cursed,
2TI 3:3 without affection, [[or good will]], without peace, false blamers [[or false challengers]], uncontinent, [[or unchaste]], unmild, without benignity,
2TI 3:4 traitors, over-thwart [[or froward]], swollen [[or blown]]with proud thoughts, blind, lovers of lusts more than of God,
2TI 3:5 having the likeness of piety, but denying the virtue of it. And eschew thou these men.
2TI 3:6 Of these they be that pierce houses, and lead women captives [[or and lead little women captive]], charged with sins, which be led with diverse desires,
2TI 3:7 evermore learning, and never perfectly coming to the science, [[or to the knowing]], of truth.
2TI 3:8 And as Jannes and Jambres against-stood Moses, so these against-stand the truth, men corrupt in understanding [[or in soul]], reproved about the faith.
2TI 3:9 But further they shall not profit, for the unwisdom of them shall be known to all men, as theirs was.
2TI 3:10 But thou hast gotten my teaching [[or my doctrine]], ordinance, purposing [[or purpose]], faith, long abiding, love, patience,
2TI 3:11 persecutions, passions, which were made to me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra, what manner persecutions I suffered, and the Lord hath delivered me of all.
2TI 3:12 And all men that will live faithfully [[or piously]] in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.
2TI 3:13 But evil men and deceivers shall increase into worse, erring [[them-selves]], and sending [[others]] into error.
2TI 3:14 But dwell thou in these things that thou hast learned, and that be betaken to thee, witting of whom thou hast learned;
2TI 3:15 for thou hast known holy letters from thy youth, which may learn thee [[or may inform thee]] to health, by faith that is in Christ Jesus.
2TI 3:16 For all scripture inspired of God is profitable to teach, to reprove, to chastise, [[for]] to learn in rightwiseness,
2TI 3:17 that the man of God be perfect, learned to all good work[[s]].
2TI 4:1 I witness before God and Christ Jesus, that shall deem the quick and the dead, by the coming of him, and he kingdom of him,
2TI 4:2 preach the word, be thou busy covenably without rest, reprove thou, beseech thou, blame thou in all patience and doctrine.
2TI 4:3 For time shall be, when men shall not suffer [[or not sustain]] whole-some teaching, but at their desires they shall gather together to themselves masters itching [[or pleasing]] to the ears.
2TI 4:4 And truly they shall turn away the hearing from truth, but to fables they shall turn.
2TI 4:5 But wake thou, in all things travail thou, do [[thou]] the work of an evangelist, fulfill thy service, [[or office]], be thou sober.
2TI 4:6 For I am sacrificed now, and the time of my departing is nigh.
2TI 4:7 I have striven a good strife, I have ended the course, I have kept the faith.
2TI 4:8 In the tother time a crown of rightwiseness is kept to me, which the Lord, a just doomsman, shall yield to me in that day; and not only to me, but also to these that love his coming.
2TI 4:9 Hie thou to come to me soon.
2TI 4:10 For Demas, loving this world, hath forsaken me, and went to Thessalonica, Crescens into Galatia, Titus into Dalmatia;
2TI 4:11 Luke alone is with me. Take thou Mark, and bring with thee; for he is profitable to me into service.
2TI 4:12 Forsooth I sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
2TI 4:13 The cloth which I left at Troas at Carpas, when thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, but most the parchments.
2TI 4:14 Alexander, the treasurer, showed to me much evil; the Lord shall yield to him after his works.
2TI 4:15 Whom also thou eschew; for he against-stood full greatly our words.
2TI 4:16 In my first defence no man helped me, but all forsook me; be it not areckoned to them.
2TI 4:17 But the Lord helped me [[or the Lord stood nigh to me]], and comforted me, that the preaching be [[full]]-filled by me, and that all folks hear, that I am delivered from the mouth of the lion.
2TI 4:18 And the Lord delivered me from all evil work, and shall make me safe into his heavenly kingdom, to whom be glory into worlds of worlds. Amen.
2TI 4:19 Greet well Prisca, and Aquila, and the house of Onesiphorus.
2TI 4:20 Erastus left [[or dwelt]] at Corinth, and I left Trophimus sick at Miletum.
2TI 4:21 Hie thou to come before winter. Eubulus, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all brethren, greet thee well.
2TI 4:22 Our Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. The grace of God be with you. Amen.
TIT 1:1 Paul, the servant of God, and apostle of Jesus Christ, by the faith of the chosen of God, and by the knowing of the truth, which is after piety,
TIT 1:2 into the hope of everlasting life, which life God that lieth not, promised before times of the world;
TIT 1:3 but he hath showed in his times his word in preaching, that is betaken to me, by the commandment of God, our Saviour,
TIT 1:4 to Titus, most dearworthy [[or beloved]] son, by the common faith, grace and peace of God the Father, and of Christ Jesus, our Saviour.
TIT 1:5 For cause of this thing I left thee at Crete, that thou amend those things that fail, and ordain priests by cities, as also I assigned to thee.
TIT 1:6 If any man is without crime, [[or great sin]], an husband of one wife, and hath faithful sons, not in accusation of lechery, or not subject.
TIT 1:7 For it behooveth a bishop to be without crime, [[as]] a dispenser of God, not proud, not wrathful, not given to drunkenness, not [[a]] smiter, not covetous of foul winning;
TIT 1:8 but holding hospitality, benign, prudent, sober, just, holy, continent,
TIT 1:9 taking [[or embracing]] that true word, that is after doctrine; that he be mighty to admonish in wholesome teaching [[or doctrine]], and to reprove them that gainsay.
TIT 1:10 For there be many unobedient, and vain speakers, and deceivers, most they that be of circumcision,
TIT 1:11 which it behooveth to be reproved; which subvert all houses, teaching which things it behooveth not, for [[the]] love of foul winning.
TIT 1:12 And one of them, their proper prophet said, Men of Crete be ever more liars, evil beasts, of slow womb.
TIT 1:13 This witnessing is true. For which cause blame them sore, that they be whole in faith,
TIT 1:14 not giving attention to fables of Jews, and to commandments of men, that turn away them [[or turn them away]] from truth.
TIT 1:15 And all things be clean to clean men; but to unclean men and to unfaithful, nothing is clean, for the soul and conscience of them be made unclean.
TIT 1:16 They acknowledge that they know God, but by deeds they deny [[him]]; when they be abominable, and unbelieveful, and reprovable to all good work.
TIT 2:1 But speak thou those things that beseem [[or that become]] wholesome teaching;
TIT 2:2 that old men be sober, chaste, prudent, whole in faith, in love, and patience;
TIT 2:3 also old women in holy habit, not slanderers [[or backbiters]], not serving much to wine, well-teaching, that they teach prudence.
TIT 2:4 Admonish thou young women, that they love their husbands, that they love their children;
TIT 2:5 and that they be prudent, chaste, sober, having care of the house, benign, subject to their husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed.
TIT 2:6 Also admonish young men, that they be sober.
TIT 2:7 In all things give thyself ensample of good works, in teaching, in wholeness [[or in holiness of living]], that is, in cleanness of soul and body, in firmness [[of virtues]].
TIT 2:8 An wholesome word, and unreprovable; that he that is of the contrary side, be ashamed, having none evil thing to say of you.
TIT 2:9 Admonish thou servants to be subject to their lords; in all things pleasing, not gainsaying,
TIT 2:10 not defrauding, but in all things showing good faith, that they honour in all things the doctrine of God, our Saviour.
TIT 2:11 For the grace of God, our Saviour, hath appeared to all men,
TIT 2:12 and taught us, that we forsake wickedness [[or unpiety]], and worldly desires, and live soberly, and justly, and piously in this world,
TIT 2:13 abiding the blessed hope and the coming of the glory of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ;
TIT 2:14 that gave himself for us, to again-buy us from all wickedness, and make clean to himself a people acceptable, and pursuer of good works.
TIT 2:15 Speak thou these things, and admonish thou, and reprove thou with all commandment; no man despise thee.
TIT 3:1 Admonish them to be subjects [[or to be subject]] to princes, and to powers; to obey to that that is said, and to be ready to all good work;
TIT 3:2 to blaspheme no man, to be not full of chiding, but temperate [[or patient]], showing all mildness to all men.
TIT 3:3 For we were sometime unwise, unbelieveful, erring, and serving to desires, and to diverse lusts, doing in malice and envy, worthy to be hated, hating each other.
TIT 3:4 But when the benignity and the manhood [[or the humanity]] of our Saviour God appeared,
TIT 3:5 not of works of rightwiseness that we did, but by his mercy he made us safe, by [[the]] washing, [[or baptism]], of again-begetting, and again-newing of the Holy Ghost,
TIT 3:6 whom he shedded [[out]] into us plenteously by Jesus Christ, our Saviour,
TIT 3:7 that we justified by his grace, be heirs by hope of everlasting life.
TIT 3:8 A true word is [[this]], and of these things I will that thou confirm others, that they that believe in God, be busy to be above [[or to be before]] others in good works. These things be good, and profitable to men.
TIT 3:9 And eschew thou foolish questions, and genealogies, and strivings [[or strives]], and fightings of the law; for those be unprofitable and vain.
TIT 3:10 Eschew [[or Shun]] thou a man heretic, after one and the second correction;
TIT 3:11 witting that he that is such a manner man is subverted, and trespasseth, and is condemned by his own doom.
TIT 3:12 When I send to thee Artemas, or Tychicus, hie thou [[or haste]] to come to me to Nicopolis; for I have purposed to dwell in winter there.
TIT 3:13 Busily before send [[or send before]] Zenas, a wise man of law, and Apollos, that nothing fail to them.
TIT 3:14 They that be of ours, learn to be governors [[or to be before]] in good works, to necessary uses, that they be not without fruit.
TIT 3:15 All men that be with me greet thee well. Greet thou well them, that love us in [[the]] faith. The grace of God be with you all. Amen.
HEB 1:1 God, that spake sometime by prophets in many manners to our fathers,
HEB 1:2 at the last in these days he hath spoken to us by the Son; whom he hath ordained heir of all things, and by whom he made the worlds.
HEB 1:3 Which when also he is the brightness of glory, and [[the]] figure of his substance, and beareth all things by word of his virtue, he maketh purgation of sins, and sitteth on the right half of the majesty in heavens;
HEB 1:4 and so much is made better than angels, by how much he hath inherited a more diverse name before them.
HEB 1:5 For to which of the angels said God any time, Thou art my Son, I have engendered thee today? And again, I shall be to him into a Father, and he shall be to me into a Son?
HEB 1:6 And when again he bringeth in the first begotten Son into the world, he saith, And all the angels of God worship him.
HEB 1:7 But he saith to angels, He that maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers flame of fire.
HEB 1:8 But to the Son he saith, God, thy throne is into the world of world[[s]]; a rod of equity is the rod of thy realm;
HEB 1:9 thou hast loved rightwiseness, and hatedest wickedness; therefore the God [[or therefore God]], thy God, anointed thee with oil of joy, more than thy fellows.
HEB 1:10 And, Thou, Lord, in the beginning foundedest the earth, and heavens be works of thine hands;
HEB 1:11 they shall perish, but thou shalt perfectly dwell; and all shall wax old as a cloth,
HEB 1:12 and thou shalt change them as a cloth, and they shall be changed. But thou art the same thyself, and thy years shall not fail.
HEB 1:13 But to which of the angels said God at any time, Sit thou on my right half, till I put thine enemies a stool of thy feet?
HEB 1:14 Whether they all be not serving spirits, sent to serve for them that take the heritage of health?
HEB 2:1 Therefore more plenteously it behooveth us to keep those things, that we have heard, lest peradventure we float away.
HEB 2:2 For if that word that was said by angels, was made firm, and each breaking of the law [[or each tres-passing]], and unobedience took just retribution of meed,
HEB 2:3 how shall we escape, if we despise so great an health? Which, when it had taken beginning to be told out by the Lord, of them that heard, is confirmed into us.
HEB 2:4 For God witnessed together by miracles [[or signs]], and wonders, and great marvels, and diverse virtues, and partings [[or distributions]] of the Holy Ghost, by his will.
HEB 2:5 But not to angels God subjected the world that is to coming, of which we speak. [[Forsooth not to angels God subjected the roundness of the earth to come, of which we speak.]]
HEB 2:6 But some man witnessed in a place, and said, What thing is man, that thou art mindful of him, or man’s son, for thou visitest him?
HEB 2:7 Thou hast made him a little less than angels; thou hast crowned him with glory and honour; and thou hast ordained him on the works of thine hands.
HEB 2:8 Thou hast made all things subject under his feet. And in that that he subjected all things to him, he left nothing unsubject to him. But now we see not yet all things subject to him;
HEB 2:9 but we see him that was made a little less than angels, Jesus, for the passion of death, crowned with glory and honour, that he through [[the]] grace of God should taste death for all men.
HEB 2:10 For it beseemed him, for whom all things, and by whom all things were made, which had brought many sons into glory, and was[[the]] author [[or the maker]] of the health or salvation of them, that he had an end by passion.
HEB 2:11 For he that halloweth, and they that be hallowed, be all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren,
HEB 2:12 saying, I shall tell thy name to my brethren; in the middle of the church I shall praise thee.
HEB 2:13 And again, I shall be trusting into him; and again, Lo! I and my children, which God gave to me.
HEB 2:14 Therefore for children communed to flesh and blood, and he also took part of the same, that by death he should destroy him that had lordship of death, that is to say, the devil,
HEB 2:15 and that he should deliver them that by dread of death, by all life were bound to servage.
HEB 2:16 And he took never angels, but he took the seed of Abraham.
HEB 2:17 Wherefore he ought to be likened to brethren by all things, that he should be made merciful and a faithful bishop to God, that he should be merciful to the trespasses of the people.
HEB 2:18 For in that thing in which he suffered, and was tempted, he is mighty to help also them that be tempted.
HEB 3:1 Therefore, holy brethren, and partners of heavenly calling, behold ye the apostle and the bishop of our confession, Jesus,
HEB 3:2 which is true to him that made him, as also Moses in all the house of him.
HEB 3:3 But this bishop is had worthy of more glory than Moses, by as much as he hath more honour of the house, that made the house.
HEB 3:4 For each house is made of some man; he that made all things of nought is God.
HEB 3:5 And Moses was true in all his house, as a servant, into witnessing of those things that were to be said;
HEB 3:6 but Christ as a son in his house. Which house we be, if we hold firm trust and glory of hope into the end.
HEB 3:7 Wherefore as the Holy Ghost saith, Today, if ye have heard his voice,
HEB 3:8 do not ye harden your hearts, as in wrathing, like the day of temptation in desert;
HEB 3:9 where your fathers tempted me, and proved, and saw my works forty years.
HEB 3:10 Wherefore I was wroth to this generation, and I said, Evermore they err in heart, for they knew not my ways;
HEB 3:11 to which I swore in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest.
HEB 3:12 Brethren, see ye, lest peradven-ture in any of you be an evil heart of unbelief, to depart from the living God.
HEB 3:13 But admonish yourselves by all days, the while today is named, that none of you be hardened by fallacy [[or falseness]] of sin.
HEB 3:14 For we be made partners of Christ, if nevertheless we hold the beginning of his substance firm into the end.
HEB 3:15 While it is said, today, if ye have heard the voice of him, do not ye harden your hearts, as in that wrathing.
HEB 3:16 For some men hearing wrathed, but not all they that went out of Egypt by Moses.
HEB 3:17 But to whom was he wrathed forty years? Whether not to them that sinned, whose carrions were cast down in desert?
HEB 3:18 And to whom swore he, that they should not enter into the rest of him [[or into his rest]], no but to them that were unbelieveful?
HEB 3:19 And we see, that they might not enter into the rest of him for unbelief.
HEB 4:1 Therefore dread we, lest peradventure while the promise of entering into his rest is left, that any of us be guessed to be away [[or to fail]].
HEB 4:2 For it is told also to us, as to them. And the word that was heard profited not to them, not mingled to faith of those things that they heard.
HEB 4:3 For we that have believed, shall enter into rest, as he said, As I swore in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest. And when the works were made perfect at the ordinance of the world,
HEB 4:4 he said thus in a place [[or in some place]] of the seventh day, And God rested in the seventh day from all his works.
HEB 4:5 And in this place again, They shall not enter into my rest.
HEB 4:6 Therefore for it pursueth, that some men shall enter into it, and they to which it was told to before, entered not for their unbelief.
HEB 4:7 Again, he determineth some day, and saith in David, Today, after so much time of time, as it is before-said, Today if ye have heard his voice, do not ye harden your hearts.
HEB 4:8 For if Jesus, that is, Joshua, had given rest to them, he should never speak of other after this day.
HEB 4:9 Therefore the sabbath [[or rest]] is left to the people of God.
HEB 4:10 For he that is entered into his rest, rested of his works, as also God of his.
HEB 4:11 Therefore haste we to enter into that rest, that no man fall into the same ensample of unbelief.
HEB 4:12 For the word of God is quick, and speedy in working, and more able to pierce than any twain-edged sword, and stretcheth forth [[till]] to the parting of the soul and of the spirit, and of the jointures and marrows, and [[it is the]] deemer of thoughts, and of intents of hearts.
HEB 4:13 And no creature is invisible in the sight of God. For all things be naked and open to his eyes, to whom a word to us.
HEB 4:14 Therefore we that have a great bishop, that pierced heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, hold we the acknowledging [[or the confession]] of our hope.
HEB 4:15 For we have not a bishop, that may not have compassion on our infirmities, but was tempted by all things by likeness, without sin.
HEB 4:16 Therefore go we with trust to the throne of his grace, that we get mercy, and find grace in covenable help.
HEB 5:1 For each bishop taken of men, is ordained for men in these things that be to God, that he offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
HEB 5:2 Which may together sorrow with them, that be unknowing, and err; for also he is environed with infirmity.
HEB 5:3 And therefore he oweth, as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins.
HEB 5:4 Neither any man taketh to him honour, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was.
HEB 5:5 So Christ clarified not himself, that he were bishop, but he that spake to him, Thou art my Son, today I engendered thee.
HEB 5:6 As in another place he saith, Thou art a priest without end, after the order of Melchizedek.
HEB 5:7 Which in the days of his flesh offered, with great cry and tears, prayers and beseechings to him that might make him safe from death, and was heard for his reverence.
HEB 5:8 And when he was God’s Son, he learned obedience of these things that he suffered;
HEB 5:9 and he brought to the end [[or he led to perfection]] is made cause of everlasting health to all that obey him,
HEB 5:10 and is called of God a bishop, by the order of Melchizedek.
HEB 5:11 Of whom there is to us a great word for to say, and able to be expounded, for ye be made feeble to hear.
HEB 5:12 For when ye ought to be masters for a time, again ye need that ye be taught, which be the letters [[or the elements]] of the beginning of God’s words. And ye be made those, to whom is need of milk, and not [[of]] firm meat.
HEB 5:13 For each that is partner of milk, is without part of the word of rightwiseness, for he is a little child.
HEB 5:14 But of perfect men is firm meat, of them that for custom have [[their]] wits exercised to discretion of good and of evil.
HEB 6:1 Therefore we bringing in a word of the beginning of Christ, be we born to the perfection of him, not again laying the foundament of penance from dead works, and of the faith to God,
HEB 6:2 and of teaching of baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of rising again of dead men, and of everlasting doom.
HEB 6:3 And this thing we shall do, if God shall suffer.
HEB 6:4 But it is impossible, that they that be once enlightened [[or illumined]], and have tasted also an heavenly gift, and be made partners of the Holy Ghost,
HEB 6:5 and nevertheless have tasted the good word of God, and the virtues of the world to coming [[or to come]],
HEB 6:6 and be slid far away, that they be renewed again to penance. Which again crucify to themselves the Son of God, and have him to scorn.
HEB 6:7 For the earth that drinketh rain oft coming on it, and bringeth forth covenable herb, to them of which it is tilled, taketh blessing of God.
HEB 6:8 But that that is bringing forth thorns and briars, is reprovable, and next to curse, whose ending shall be into burning.
HEB 6:9 But, ye most dearworthy, we trust of you better things, and nearer to health, though we speak so.
HEB 6:10 For God is not unjust, that he forget your work and love, which ye have showed in his name; for ye have ministered to saints, and minister.
HEB 6:11 And we covet that each of you show the same busyness to the [[full]]-filling of hope into the end;
HEB 6:12 that ye be not made slow, but also pursuers of them, which by faith and patience shall inherit the promises.
HEB 6:13 For God promising to Abraham, for he had none greater, by whom he should swear, swore by himself,
HEB 6:14 and said, I blessing shall bless thee, and I multiplying shall multiply thee;
HEB 6:15 and so he long abiding had the promise [[or got repromission]].
HEB 6:16 For men swear by a greater than themselves, and the end of all their plea, [[or all their controversy, or debate]], is an oath to confirmation.
HEB 6:17 In which thing God willing to show plenteouslier, to the heirs of his promise the firmness [[or the unmoveableness]] of his counsel, put betwixt an oath,
HEB 6:18 that by two things unmoveable, by which it is impossible that God lie, we have strongest solace, [[or comfort]], we that flee together to hold the hope that is put forth to us.
HEB 6:19 Which hope as an anchor we have secure to the soul, and firm, and going into the inner things of hiding;
HEB 6:20 where the before-goer, Jesus, that is made bishop without end by the order of Melchizedek, entered for us.
HEB 7:1 And this Melchizedek, king of Salem, and [[the]] priest of the highest God, which met Abraham, as he turned again from the slaying of the kings, and blessed him;
HEB 7:2 to whom also Abraham parted tithes of all things; first he is said king of rightwiseness, and afterward king of Salem, that is to say, king of peace,
HEB 7:3 without father, without mother, without genealogy, neither having beginning of days, neither end of life; and he is likened to the Son of God, and dwelleth priest without end.
HEB 7:4 But behold ye how great is this [[man]], to whom Abraham the patriarch gave tithes of the best things.
HEB 7:5 For men of the sons of Levi taking priesthood have commandment to take tithes of the people, by the law, that is to say, of their brethren, though also they went out of the loins of Abraham.
HEB 7:6 But he whose generation is not numbered in them, took tithes of Abraham; and he blessed this Abraham, which had repromissions.
HEB 7:7 Without any gainsaying, that that is less, is blessed of the better.
HEB 7:8 And here deadly men take tithes; but there he beareth witnessing, that he liveth.
HEB 7:9 And that it be said so, by Abraham also Levi, that took tithes, was tithed;
HEB 7:10 and yet he was in his father’s loins, when Melchizedek met him.
HEB 7:11 Therefore if perfection was by the priesthood of Levi, for under him the people took the law, what yet was it needful, another priest to rise, by the order of Melchizedek, and not to be said by the order of Aaron?
HEB 7:12 For why when the priesthood is translated, it is need[[ful]] that also [[the]] translation of the law be made.
HEB 7:13 But he in whom these things be said, is of another lineage, of which no man was priest to the altar.
HEB 7:14 For it is open [[or it is openly known]], that our Lord is born of Judah, in which lineage Moses spake nothing of priests.
HEB 7:15 And more yet it is known, if by the order of Melchizedek another priest is risen up;
HEB 7:16 which is not made by the law of fleshly commandment, but by [[the]] virtue of life that may not be undone [[or is indissoluble]].
HEB 7:17 For he witnesseth, That thou art a priest without end, by the order of Melchizedek;
HEB 7:18 that reproving of the command-ment before-going is made, for the unfirmness and unprofit of it.
HEB 7:19 For why the law brought nothing to perfection, but there is a bringing in of a better hope, by which we nigh to God.
HEB 7:20 And how great it is, not without swearing, [[that Christ is made priest after the order of Melchizedek]];
HEB 7:21 but the others be made priests without an oath; but this priest with an oath, by him that said to him, The Lord swore, and it shall not rue him, Thou art a priest without end, by the order of Melchizedek;
HEB 7:22 in so much Jesus is made [[better]] promiser of the better testament.
HEB 7:23 And [[soothly]] the others were made many priests, therefore for they were forbidden by death to dwell still;
HEB 7:24 but this man, for he dwelleth without end, hath an everlasting priesthood.
HEB 7:25 Wherefore also he may save without end, coming nigh by himself to God, and evermore liveth to pray for us.
HEB 7:26 For it beseemed that such a man were a bishop to us, holy, innocent, undefouled, clean, separated from sinful men, and made higher than heavens;
HEB 7:27 which hath not need each day, as priests, first for his own guilts to offer sacrifices, and afterward for the people; for he did this thing in offering himself once.
HEB 7:28 And the law ordained men priests having sickness, [[or frailty]]; but the word of swearing, which is after the law, ordained the Son perfect without end.
HEB 8:1 But a capital, that is, a short comprehending of many things, on those things that be said. We have such a bishop, that sat on the right half of the seat of greatness in heavens,
HEB 8:2 the minister of saints, and of the very tabernacle, that God made, and not man.
HEB 8:3 For each bishop is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices; wherefore it is need, that also this bishop have something that he shall offer.
HEB 8:4 Therefore if he were on earth, he were no priest, when there were that should offer gifts by the law,
HEB 8:5 which serve to the exemplar, [[or figure]], and shadow of heavenly things. As it was answered to Moses, when he should end [[or should make]] the tabernacle, See [[thou]], he said, make thou all things by the exemplar, that is showed to thee in the mount.
HEB 8:6 But now he hath gotten a better ministry, by so much as he is a mediator of a better testament, which is confirmed with better promises.
HEB 8:7 For if that first had lacked blame, the place of the second should not have been sought.
HEB 8:8 For he reproving them saith, Lo! days come, saith the Lord, and I shall make perfect a new testament on the house of Israel, and on the house of Judah;
HEB 8:9 not like the testament that I made to their fathers, in the day in which I caught their hand, that I should lead them out of the land of Egypt; for they dwelled not perfectly in my testament, and I have despised them, saith the Lord.
HEB 8:10 But this is the testament which I shall assign [[or I shall dispose]] to the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord, in giving my laws into the souls of them, and into the hearts of them I shall above write them; and I shall be to them into a God [[or into God]], and they shall be to me into a people.
HEB 8:11 And each man shall not teach his neighbour, and each man his brother, saying, Know thou the Lord; for all men shall know me, from the least to the more of them.
HEB 8:12 For I shall be merciful to the wickedness of them, and now I shall not bethink on the sins of them.
HEB 8:13 But in saying a new the former waxed old; and that that is of many days, and waxeth old, is nigh the death.
HEB 9:1 And the former testament had justifyings of worship, and holy thing enduring for a time.
HEB 9:2 For the tabernacle was made first, in which were candlesticks, and [[a]] board, and setting forth [[or putting forth]] of loaves, which is said holy.
HEB 9:3 And after the veil, the second tabernacle, that is said sanctum sanctorum, that is, holy of holy things;
HEB 9:4 having a golden censer, and the ark of the testament, covered about on each side with gold, in which was a pot of gold having manna, and the rod of Aaron that flowered, and the tables of the testament;
HEB 9:5 on which things were cherubims of glory, overshadowing the propiti-atory, [[or mercyable place]]; of which things it is not now to say by all.
HEB 9:6 But when these were made thus together, priests entered evermore in the former tabernacle, doing the offices of sacrifices;
HEB 9:7 but in the second tabernacle, the bishop, [[alone]]entered once in the year, not without blood, which he offered for his ignorance and the people’s.
HEB 9:8 For the Holy Ghost signified this thing, that not yet the way of saints was opened, while the former tabernacle had state.
HEB 9:9 Which parable is of this present time, by which also gifts and sacrifices be offered, which may not make a man serving perfect by conscience,
HEB 9:10 only in meats, and drinks, and diverse washings, and rightwisenesses of flesh, that were set [[till]] to the time of correction.
HEB 9:11 But Christ being a bishop of goods to coming [[or to come]], entered by a larger and perfecter tabernacle, not made by hand, that is to say, not of this making,
HEB 9:12 neither by blood of goat bucks, or of calves, but by his own blood, entered once into the holy things, that were found by an everlasting redemption.
HEB 9:13 For if the blood of goat bucks, and of bulls, and the ashes of a cow calf sprinkled, halloweth unclean men to the cleansing of flesh,
HEB 9:14 how much more the blood of Christ, which by the Holy Ghost offered himself unwemmed to God, shall cleanse our conscience from dead works, to serve God that liveth? [[or to serve to living God?]]
HEB 9:15 And therefore he is a mediator of the new testament, that by death falling betwixt, into redemption of the trespassings that were under the former testament, they that be called take the behest of everlasting heritage.
HEB 9:16 For where a testament is, it is need, that the death of the testament-maker come betwixt.
HEB 9:17 For a testament is confirmed in dead men; else it is not worth [[or no worth]], while he liveth, that made the testament.
HEB 9:18 Wherefore neither the first testament was hallowed without blood.
HEB 9:19 For when each commandment of the law was read of Moses to all the people, he took the blood of calves, and of bucks of goats, with water, and red wool, and hyssop, and besprinkled both that book and all the people,
HEB 9:20 and said, This is the blood of the testament that God commanded to you.
HEB 9:21 Also he sprinkled with blood the tabernacle, and all the vessels of the service in like manner.
HEB 9:22 And almost all things be cleansed in blood by the law; and without shedding of blood remission of sins is not made.
HEB 9:23 Therefore it is need, that the exemplars of heavenly things be cleansed with these things; but those heavenly things with better sacrifices than these.
HEB 9:24 For Jesus entered not into holy things made by hands, that be[[the]] exemplars of very things, but into heaven itself, that he appear now to the face of God for us;
HEB 9:25 neither that he offer himself oft, as the bishop entered into holy things by all years in alien blood,
HEB 9:26 else it behooved him to suffer oft from the beginning of the world; but now once in the ending of the worlds, to the destruction of sin by his sacrifice he appeared.
HEB 9:27 And as it is ordained to men, once to die, but after this is the doom,
HEB 9:28 so Christ was offered once, to void, [[or do away]], the sins of many men; the second time he shall appear without sin to men that abide him into health.
HEB 10:1 For the law having a shadow of good things to come, not that image of things, may never make men nighing [[or coming nigh]] perfect by those same sacrifices, which they offer without ceasing by all years;
HEB 10:2 else they should have ceased to be offered, for as much as the worshippers cleansed once, had not furthermore conscience of sin.
HEB 10:3 But in them [[by oft offering]], mind of sins is made by all years.
HEB 10:4 For it is impossible that sins be done away by blood of bulls, and of bucks of goats.
HEB 10:5 Therefore he entering into the world, saith, Thou wouldest not sacrifice and offering; but thou hast shaped a body to me;
HEB 10:6 [[and]] burnt sacrifices also for sin pleased not to thee.
HEB 10:7 Then I said, Lo! I come; in the beginning of the book it is written of me, that I do thy will, God.
HEB 10:8 He saying before, That thou wouldest not sacrifices, and offerings, and burnt sacrifices for sin, nor those things be pleasant to thee, which be offered by the law,
HEB 10:9 then I said, Lo! I come, that I do thy will, God. He doeth away the first, that he make steadfast the second.
HEB 10:10 In which will we be hallowed by the offering of the body of Christ Jesus once.
HEB 10:11 And each priest is ready ministering each day, and oft times offering the same sacrifices, which may never do away sins.
HEB 10:12 But this man offering one sacrifice for sins, for evermore sitteth in [[or on]] the right half of God the Father;
HEB 10:13 from thenceforth abiding, till his enemies be put a stool of [[or under]] his feet.
HEB 10:14 For by one offering he made perfect for ever[[more]] hallowed men.
HEB 10:15 And the Holy Ghost witnesseth to us; for after that he said,
HEB 10:16 This is the testament, which I shall witness to them after those days, the Lord saith, in giving my laws in the hearts of them, and in the souls of them I shall above write them;
HEB 10:17 and now I shall no more think on the sins and the wickedness of them.
HEB 10:18 And where remission of these is, now is there none offering for sin.
HEB 10:19 Therefore, brethren, having trust into the entering of holy things, in the blood of Christ,
HEB 10:20 which [[he]] hallowed to us a new way, and living by the covering [[or by a veil]], that is to say, his flesh,
HEB 10:21 and we having the great priest on the house of God,
HEB 10:22 nigh we with very heart, in the plenty of faith; and be our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with clean water,
HEB 10:23 and hold we the confession of our hope, bowing to no side, [[or unbowing, or unpliable]]; for he is true that hath made the promise.
HEB 10:24 And behold we together in the stirring of charity, and of good works;
HEB 10:25 not forsaking our gathering together, as it is the custom to some men, but comforting [[them]], and by so much the more, by how much ye see the day nighing.
HEB 10:26 For why now a sacrifice for sins is not left to us, that sin willfully, after that we have taken the knowing of truth.
HEB 10:27 For why some abiding of doom is dreadful, and the pursuing of fire, which shall waste adversaries.
HEB 10:28 Who that breaketh Moses’ law, dieth without any mercy, by two or three witnesses;
HEB 10:29 how much more guess ye, that he deserveth worse torments, which defouleth the Son of God, and holdeth the blood of the testament polluted, in which he is hallowed, and doeth despite [[or wrong]] to the Spirit of grace?
HEB 10:30 For we know him that said, To me vengeance, and I shall yield. And again, For the Lord shall deem his people.
HEB 10:31 It is fearedful to fall into the hands of God living. [[+It is fearful to fall into the hands of living God.]]
HEB 10:32 And have ye mind on the former days, in which ye were enlightened, and suffered great strife of passions.
HEB 10:33 And in the tother ye were made a spectacle by shames, and tribulations; in another ye were made fellows of men living so.
HEB 10:34 For also to bound men ye had compassion, and ye received with joy the robbing of your goods, knowing that ye have a better and a dwelling substance.
HEB 10:35 Therefore do not ye lose your trust, which hath great rewarding.
HEB 10:36 For patience is needful to you, that ye do the will of God, and bring again the promise.
HEB 10:37 For yet a little, and he that is to come shall come, and he shall not tarry.
HEB 10:38 For my just man liveth of faith; that if he withdraweth himself, he shall not please to my soul.
HEB 10:39 But we be not the sons of withdrawing away into perdition, but of faith into [[the]] getting of soul.
HEB 11:1 But faith is the substance of things that be to be hoped [[or the substance of things to be hoped]], and an argument, [[or certainty]], of things not appearing.
HEB 11:2 And in this faith old men have gotten witnessing.
HEB 11:3 By faith we understand that the worlds were made [[or were shaped]] by God’s word, that visible things were made of invisible things.
HEB 11:4 By faith Abel offered a much more sacrifice than Cain to God [[or Abel offered full much more host, or sacrifice, to God than Cain]], by which he got witnessing to be just, for God bare witnessing to his gifts; and by that faith he dead speaketh yet.
HEB 11:5 By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death; and he was not found, for the Lord translated him. For before [[the]] translation he had witnessing that he pleased God.
HEB 11:6 And it is impossible to please God without faith. For it behooveth that a man coming to God, believe that he is, and that he is [[a]] rewarder of men that seek him.
HEB 11:7 By faith Noah dreaded, through answer taken of these things that yet were not seen, and shaped a ship [[or an ark]] into the health of his house; by which he condemned the world, and is ordained heir of rightwiseness, which is by faith.
HEB 11:8 By faith he that is called Abraham, obeyed to go out into a place, which he should take into heritage; and he went out, not witting whither he should go.
HEB 11:9 By faith he dwelt in the land of promise, as in an alien land, dwelling in little houses with Isaac and Jacob, even-heirs of the same promise.
HEB 11:10 For he abode a city having foundaments, whose craftsman and maker is God.
HEB 11:11 By faith also that Sarah barren, took virtue in conceiving of seed, yea, against the time of age; for she believed him true, that had promised.
HEB 11:12 For which thing of one, and yet nigh dead, there were born as stars of heaven in multitude, and as gravel, that is at the seaside out of number [[or unnumberable]].
HEB 11:13 By faith all these be dead, when the behests were not taken, but they beheld them afar, and greeting them well, and acknowledged that they were pilgrims, and harboured men on the earth.
HEB 11:14 And they that say these things, signify that they seek a country.
HEB 11:15 If they had had mind of that, of which they went out, they had time of turning again;
HEB 11:16 but now they desire a better, that is to say, heavenly. Therefore God is not confounded, [[or ashamed]], to be called the God of them; for he made ready to them a city.
HEB 11:17 By faith Abraham offered Isaac, when he was tempted; and he offered the one begotten [[son]], which had taken the behests;
HEB 11:18 to whom it was said, For in Isaac the seed shall be called to thee.
HEB 11:19 For he deemed, that God is mighty to raise him, yea, from death; wherefore he took him also into a parable.
HEB 11:20 By faith also of things to coming [[or to come]], Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau.
HEB 11:21 By faith Jacob dying blessed all the sons of Joseph, and honoured the highness of his staff [[or of his rod]].
HEB 11:22 By faith Joseph dying had mind of the passing forth of the children of Israel, and commanded of his bones.
HEB 11:23 By faith Moses born, was hid three months of his father and mother, for that they saw the young child fair, [[or seemly]]; and they dreaded not the commandment of the king.
HEB 11:24 By faith Moses was made great, and denied that he was the son of Pharaoh’s daughter,
HEB 11:25 and chose more [[or rather]] to be tormented with the people of God, than to have mirth of temporal sin;
HEB 11:26 deeming the reproof of Christ more riches, than the treasures of [[the]] Egyptians; for he beheld into the rewarding.
HEB 11:27 By faith he forsook Egypt, and dreaded not the hardness of the king; for he abode, as seeing him that was invisible.
HEB 11:28 By faith he hallowed pask, and the shedding out of blood, that he that destroyed the first things of[[the]]Egyptians, should not touch them.
HEB 11:29 By faith they passed the Red Sea, as by dry land, which thing Egyptians assaying were devoured [[in the waters]].
HEB 11:30 By faith the walls of Jericho felled down, by compassing of seven days.
HEB 11:31 By faith Rahab the whore received the spies with peace, and perished not with unbelieveful men.
HEB 11:32 And what yet shall I say? For time shall fail to me telling of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, and Samuel, and of other prophets;
HEB 11:33 which by faith overcame realms, wrought rightwiseness, got repromis-sions; they stopped the mouths of lions,
HEB 11:34 they quenched the fierceness of fire, they drove away the edge of sword, they recovered of sickness, they were made strong in battle, they turned the hosts of aliens.
HEB 11:35 Women received their dead children from death to life; but others were held forth, [[or died]], not taking redemption, that they should find a better again-rising.
HEB 11:36 And others assayed scornings and beatings, moreover and bonds and prisons.
HEB 11:37 They were stoned, they were sawed, they were tempted, they were dead in slaying of sword. They went about in badger skins, and in skins of goats, needy, anguished, tormented;
HEB 11:38 to which the world was not worthy. They wandered in wilder-nesses, and in mountains and dens, and [[in]] caves of the earth.
HEB 11:39 And all these, proved by witnessing of faith, took not repromission;
HEB 11:40 for God provided some better thing for us, that they should not be made perfect without us.
HEB 12:1 Therefore we that have so great a cloud of witnesses put to [[us]], do we away all charge, and sin standing about us, and by patience run we to the battle, [[or the strife, or fight]], purposed to us,
HEB 12:2 beholding into the maker of faith, and the perfect ender, Jesus; which when joy was purposed to him, he suffered the cross, and despised confusion, and sitteth on the right half of the seat of God.
HEB 12:3 And bethink ye on him that suffered such gainsaying of sinful men against himself, that ye be not made weary, failing in your souls.
HEB 12:4 For ye against-stood not yet unto blood, fighting against sin.
HEB 12:5 And ye have forgotten the comfort that speaketh to you as to sons, and saith, My son, do not thou despise the teaching [[or the discipline]] of the Lord, neither be thou made weary, the while thou art chastised of him.
HEB 12:6 For the Lord chastiseth him that he loveth; he beateth [[or scourgeth]] every son that he receiveth.
HEB 12:7 Abide ye still in chastising [[or discipline]]; God proffereth [[or offereth]] him to you as to sons. For what son is it, whom the father chastiseth not?
HEB 12:8 That if ye be out of chastising [[or discipline]], whose partners be ye all made, then ye be adulterers, and not sons.
HEB 12:9 And afterward we had fathers of our flesh, teachers, and we with reverence dreaded them. Whether not much more we shall obey to the Father of spirits, and we shall live?
HEB 12:10 And they in time of few days taught us by their will; but this Father teacheth to that thing that is profitable, in receiving the hallowing of him.
HEB 12:11 And each chastising in [[this]] present time seemeth to be not of joy, but of sorrow; but afterward it shall yield fruit of rightwiseness most peaceable to men exercised by it.
HEB 12:12 For which thing raise ye [[up]] slow hands, and knees unbound,
HEB 12:13 and make ye rightful steps to your feet; that no man halting err, but more be healed.
HEB 12:14 Pursue ye peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see God.
HEB 12:15 Behold ye, that no man fail to the grace of God, that no root of bitterness burrowing upward hinder [[us]], and many be defouled by it;
HEB 12:16 that no man be lecher, either unholy, as Esau, which for one [[meal’s]] meat sold his first things, [[or heritage]].
HEB 12:17 For know ye, that afterward he coveting to inherit blessing, was reproved. For he found not place of penance, though he sought it with tears.
HEB 12:18 But ye have not come to the fire able to be touched, and able to come to, and to the whirlwind [[or the great wind]], and mist, and tempest,
HEB 12:19 and sound of trump, and voice of words; which they that heard, excused them, that the word should not be made to them.
HEB 12:20 For they bare not that that was said, And if a beast touched the hill, it was stoned [[or it shall be stoned]].
HEB 12:21 And so dreadful it was that was seen, that Moses said, I am afeared, and full of trembling.
HEB 12:22 But ye have come nigh to the hill [[of]] Zion, and to the city of God living [[or of living God]], the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the multitude of many thousand angels,
HEB 12:23 and to the church of the first men, which be written in heavens, and to God, doomsman of all, and to the spirit of just perfect men,
HEB 12:24 and to Jesus, mediator of the new testament, and to the sprinkling of blood, speaking better than Abel [[or better speaking than Abel’s blood]].
HEB 12:25 See ye, that ye forsake [[or refuse]] not the speaker; for if they that forsaked [[or refusing]] him that spake on the earth, escaped not, much more we that turn away from him that speaketh to us from heavens.
HEB 12:26 Whose voice then moved the earth, but now he again promiseth, and saith, Yet once and I shall move not only the earth, but also heaven.
HEB 12:27 And that he saith, Yet once, he declareth the translation of moveable things, as of made things, that those things dwell, that be unmoveable.
HEB 12:28 Therefore we receiving the kingdom unmoveable, have we grace, by which serve we pleasing to God with dread and reverence.
HEB 12:29 For our God is fire that wasteth.
HEB 13:1 The charity of brotherhood dwell in you,
HEB 13:2 and do not ye forget hospitality; for by this some men pleased to angels, that were received to harbour.
HEB 13:3 Think ye on bound men, as ye were together bound, and of travailing men, as yourselves dwelling in the body.
HEB 13:4 Wedding is in all things honourable, and bed unwemmed [[or undefouled]]; for God shall deem fornicators and adulterers.
HEB 13:5 Be your manners without covetousness, satisfied with present things; for he said, I shall not leave thee, neither forsake,
HEB 13:6 so that we say trustily, The Lord is an helper to me; I shall not dread what a man shall do to me.
HEB 13:7 Have ye mind of your sovereigns, that have spoken to you the word of God; of whom behold ye the going out of living, and pursue ye the faith of them,
HEB 13:8 Jesus Christ, yesterday, and today, he is also into worlds.
HEB 13:9 Do not ye be led away with diverse and strange teachings. For it is best to stable the heart with grace, not with meats, which profited not to men wandering [[or going]] in them.
HEB 13:10 We have an altar, of which they that serve to the tabernacle, have not power [[or leave]] to eat.
HEB 13:11 For of which beasts the blood is borne in for sin into holy things by the bishop, the bodies of them be burnt without the castles.
HEB 13:12 For which thing Jesus, that he should hallow the people by his blood, suffered without the gate.
HEB 13:13 Therefore go we out to him without the castles, bearing his reproof.
HEB 13:14 For we have not here a city dwelling, but we seek a city to coming [[or to come]].
HEB 13:15 Therefore by him offer we a sacrifice of praising evermore to God, that is to say, the fruit of lips acknowledging to his name.
HEB 13:16 And do not ye forget well-doing, and communing; for by such sacrifices God is well-served.
HEB 13:17 Obey ye to your sovereigns, and be ye subject to them; for they perfectly wake, as to yielding reason for your souls, that they do this thing with joy, and not sorrowing; for this thing speedeth not to you.
HEB 13:18 Pray ye for us, and we trust that we have good conscience in all things, willing to live well.
HEB 13:19 Moreover I beseech you to do [[this thing]], that I be restored the sooner to you.
HEB 13:20 And God of peace, that led out from death the great shepherd of sheep, in the blood of [[the]] ever-lasting testament, our Lord Jesus Christ,
HEB 13:21 shape you in all good thing [[or make you able in each good work]], that ye do the will of him; and he do in you that thing that shall please before him, by Jesus Christ, to whom be glory into worlds of worlds. Amen.
HEB 13:22 And, brethren, I pray you, that ye suffer a word of solace; for by full few things I have written to you.
HEB 13:23 Know ye our brother Timothy, that is sent forth, with whom if he shall come more hastily, I shall see you.
HEB 13:24 Greet ye well all your sovereigns, and all holy men [[or all saints]]. The brethren of Italy greet you well.
HEB 13:25 The grace of God be with you all. Amen.
JAM 1:1 James, the servant of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve kindreds, that be in scattering abroad, health.
JAM 1:2 My brethren, deem ye all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations,
JAM 1:3 witting that the proving of your faith worketh patience;
JAM 1:4 and patience hath a perfect work, that ye be perfect and whole, and fail in nothing.
JAM 1:5 And if any of you needeth wisdom, ask he of God, which giveth to all men largely, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given to him.
JAM 1:6 But ask he in faith, and doubt nothing; for he that doubteth, is like to a wave of the sea, which is moved and borne about of the wind.
JAM 1:7 Therefore guess not that man, that he shall take anything of the Lord.
JAM 1:8 A man double in soul is unstable in all his ways.
JAM 1:9 And a meek brother have glory in his enhancing,
JAM 1:10 and a rich man in his lowness; for as the flower of grass he shall pass.
JAM 1:11 The sun rose up with heat, and dried the grass [[or the hay]], and the flower of it felled down, and the fairness of his cheer perished; and so a rich man withereth in his ways.
JAM 1:12 Blessed is the man, that suffereth temptation; for when he shall be proved, he shall receive the crown of life, which God promised to men that love him.
JAM 1:13 No man when he is tempted, say, that he is tempted of God; for why God is not a tempter of evil things, for he tempteth no man.
JAM 1:14 But each man is tempted, drawn and stirred, of his own coveting. [[Soothly each man is tempted of his own coveting, drawn from reason, and snared, or deceived.]]
JAM 1:15 Afterward [[or Then]] coveting, when it hath conceived, bringeth forth sin; but sin, when it is [[ful]] filled, engendereth death.
JAM 1:16 Therefore, my most dearworthy brethren, do not ye err.
JAM 1:17 Each good gift, and each perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is none other changing, nor over-shadowing of reward.
JAM 1:18 For willfully he begat us by the word of truth, that we be a beginning of his creature.
JAM 1:19 Know ye, my brethren most loved, be each man swift to hear, but slow to speak, and slow to wrath;
JAM 1:20 for the wrath of man worketh not the rightwiseness of God.
JAM 1:21 For which thing cast ye away all uncleanness, and plenty of malice, and in mildness, receive ye the word that is planted, that may save your souls.
JAM 1:22 But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.
JAM 1:23 For if any man is an hearer of the word, and not a doer, this shall be likened to a man that beholdeth the cheer of his birth in a mirror;
JAM 1:24 for he beheld himself, and went away, and anon he forgot which [[or what]] he was.
JAM 1:25 But he that beholdeth into the law of perfect freedom, and dwelleth in it, and is not made a forgetful hearer, but a doer of work, this shall be blessed in his deed.
JAM 1:26 And if any man guesseth himself to be religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but deceiveth his heart, the religion of him is vain.
JAM 1:27 A clean religion, and unwemmed with God and the Father, is this, to visit fatherless and motherless children, and widows in their tribulation, and to keep himself undefouled from this world.
JAM 2:1 My brethren, do not ye have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory, in acception of persons. [[My brethren, do not in acception, or taking, of persons, have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory.]]
JAM 2:2 For if a man that hath a golden ring, and in a fair clothing, cometh in your company, and a poor man entereth in a foul clothing,
JAM 2:3 and if ye behold into him that is clothed with clear clothing, and if ye say to him, Sit thou here well; but to the poor man ye say, Stand thou there, either sit under the stool of my feet;
JAM 2:4 whether ye deem not with your-selves, and be made doomsmen of wicked thoughts?
JAM 2:5 Hear ye, my most dearworthy brethren, whether God chose not poor men in this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, that God promised to men that love him?
JAM 2:6 But ye have despised the poor man. Whether rich men oppress not you by power, and they draw you to dooms?
JAM 2:7 Whether they blaspheme not the good name, that is called to help on you? [[or that is in-called of you?]]
JAM 2:8 Nevertheless if ye perform the King’s law, by scriptures, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye do well.
JAM 2:9 But if ye take persons, ye work sin, and be reproved of the law, as trespassers [[or as transgressors]].
JAM 2:10 And whoever keepeth all the law, but offendeth in one, he is made guilty of all.
JAM 2:11 For he that said, Thou shalt do no lechery [[or Thou shalt not do lechery]], said also, Thou shalt not slay; that if thou doest no lechery, but thou slayest, thou art made [[a]] trespasser of the law.
JAM 2:12 Thus speak ye, and thus do ye, as beginning to be deemed by the law of freedom.
JAM 2:13 For why doom without mercy is to him, that doeth no mercy; but mercy above raiseth doom.
JAM 2:14 My brethren, what shall it profit, if any man say that he hath faith, but he hath not works? whether faith shall be able to save him?
JAM 2:15 And if a brother or sister be naked, and have need of each day’s livelode [[or lifelode]],
JAM 2:16 and if any of you say to them, Go ye in peace, be ye made hot, and be ye [[full]]-filled; but if ye give not to them those things that be necessary to the body, what shall it profit?
JAM 2:17 So also faith, if it hath not works, is dead in itself.
JAM 2:18 But some man shall say, Thou hast faith, and I have works; show thou to me thy faith without works, and I shall show to thee my faith of works.
JAM 2:19 Thou believest, that one God is; thou doest well; and devils believe, and [[together]] tremble.
JAM 2:20 But wilt thou know, thou vain man, that faith without works is idle?
JAM 2:21 Whether Abraham, our father, was not justified of works, offering Isaac, his son, on the altar?
JAM 2:22 Therefore thou seest, that faith wrought with his works, and his faith was [[ful]] filled of works.
JAM 2:23 And the scripture was [[ful]] filled, saying, Abraham believed to God, and it was areckoned to him to rightwiseness, and he was called the friend of God.
JAM 2:24 Ye see that a man is justified of works, and not of faith only.
JAM 2:25 In like manner, whether also Rahab, the whore, was not justified of works, and received the messengers, and sent them out by another way?
JAM 2:26 For as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.
JAM 3:1 My brethren, do not ye be made many masters, witting that ye take the more doom.
JAM 3:2 For all we offend in many things. If any man offendeth not in word, this is a perfect man, for also he may lead about all the body with a bridle.
JAM 3:3 For if we put bridles into horses’ mouths, for to consent to us, and we lead about all the body of them.
JAM 3:4 And lo! ships, when they be great, and be driven of strong winds, yet they be borne about of a little rudder, where the moving of the governor will.
JAM 3:5 So also the tongue is but a little member, and raiseth great things. Lo! how little fire burneth [[or kindleth]] a full great wood.
JAM 3:6 And our tongue is fire, the university of wickedness. The tongue is ordained in our members, which defouleth all the body; and it is enflamed, [[or set afire]], of hell, and enflameth the wheel of our birth.
JAM 3:7 And all the kind of beasts, and of fowls, and of serpents, and of others is chastised, and those be made tame of man’s kind;
JAM 3:8 but no man may chastise the tongue, for it is an unpeaceable evil, and full of deadly venom.
JAM 3:9 In it we bless God, the Father, and in it we curse men, that be made to the likeness of God.
JAM 3:10 Of the same mouth passeth [[or cometh]] forth blessing and cursing. My brethren, it behooveth not that these things be done so.
JAM 3:11 Whether a well of the same hole bringeth forth sweet and salt water?
JAM 3:12 My brethren, whether a fig tree may make grapes, either a vine figs? So neither salt water may make sweet water.
JAM 3:13 Who is wise, and taught among you? show he of good living his working [[or his work]], in mildness of his wisdom.
JAM 3:14 That if ye have bitter envy, and strivings [[or strives]] be in your hearts, do not ye have glory, and be liars against the truth.
JAM 3:15 For this wisdom is not from above coming down, but earthly, and beastly, and fiendly.
JAM 3:16 For where is envy and strife, there is unsteadfastness and all shrewd work.
JAM 3:17 But wisdom that is from above, first it is chaste, afterward peaceable, mild, able to be counselled [[or persuadable]], consenting to good things, full of mercy and of good fruits, deeming without feigning.
JAM 3:18 And the fruit of rightwiseness is sown in peace, to men that make peace.
JAM 4:1 Whereof be battles and chidings among you? Whether not of your covetings, that fight in your members?
JAM 4:2 Ye covet, and ye have not; ye slay, and ye have envy, and ye may not get. Ye chide, and make battle; and ye have not, for that ye ask not.
JAM 4:3 Ye ask, and ye receive not; for that ye ask evil, as ye show openly in your covetings.
JAM 4:4 Adulterers, know not ye, that the friendship of this world is enemy [[or enmity]] to God? Therefore whoever will be the friend of this world, is made the enemy of God.
JAM 4:5 Whether ye guess, that the scripture saith vainly, The spirit that dwelleth in you, coveteth to envy?
JAM 4:6 But he giveth the more grace; for which thing he saith, God withstandeth proud men, but to meek men he giveth grace.
JAM 4:7 Therefore be ye subject to God; but withstand ye the devil, and he shall flee from you.
JAM 4:8 Nigh ye to God, and he shall nigh to you. Ye sinners, cleanse ye the hands, and ye double in soul [[or ye double of will]], purge ye the hearts.
JAM 4:9 Be ye wretches, and wail ye [[or weep ye]]; your laughing be turned into weeping, and [[your]] joy into sorrow of heart.
JAM 4:10 Be ye meeked in the sight of the Lord, and he shall enhance you.
JAM 4:11 My brethren, do not ye backbite each other. He that backbiteth his brother, either that deemeth his brother, backbiteth the law, and deemeth the law. And if thou deemest the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but a doomsman.
JAM 4:12 But one is Maker of the law, and Judge, that may lose and deliver. And who art thou, that deemest thy neighbour?
JAM 4:13 Lo! now ye, that say, Today either tomorrow we shall go into that city, and there we shall dwell a year, and we shall make merchandise, and we shall make winning;
JAM 4:14 which know not, what is to you in the morrow. For what is your life? A smoke [[or A vapour]] appearing at a little time, and afterward it shall be wasted.
JAM 4:15 Therefore that ye say, If the Lord will, and if we live, we shall do this thing, either that thing.
JAM 4:16 And now ye make full out joy in your prides; every such joying is wicked.
JAM 4:17 Therefore it is sin to him, that knoweth to do good, and doeth not.
JAM 5:1 Do now, ye rich men, weep ye, yelling in your wretchednesses that shall come to you.
JAM 5:2 Your riches be rotten, and your clothes be eaten of moths.
JAM 5:3 Your gold and silver hath rusted, and the rust of them shall be to you into witnessing, and shall eat your fleshes, as fire. Ye have treasured to you wrath in the last days.
JAM 5:4 Lo! the hire of your workmen, that reaped your fields, which is defrauded of you, crieth; and the cry of them hath entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts.
JAM 5:5 Ye have eaten on the earth, and in your lecheries ye have nourished your hearts. In the day of slaying
JAM 5:6 ye brought, and slew the just Man, and he against-stood not you. [[ye led to, and slew the just man, and he withstood you not.]]
JAM 5:7 Therefore, brethren, be ye patient, till to the coming of the Lord. Lo! an earth-tiller abideth [[the]] precious fruit of the earth, patiently suffering, till he receive timeful and lateful fruit.
JAM 5:8 And be ye patient, and confirm ye your hearts, for the coming of the Lord shall nigh.
JAM 5:9 Brethren, do not ye be sorrowful [[or do not ye be scornful]] each to other, that ye be not deemed. Lo! the judge standeth nigh before the gate.
JAM 5:10 Brethren, take ye ensample of evil going out, and of long abiding, and travail, [[or and of long abiding of travail]], and of patience, the prophets, that spake to you in the name of the Lord.
JAM 5:11 Lo! we bless them that suffered. Ye have heard the patience of Job, and ye saw the end of the Lord, for the Lord is merciful, and doing mercy.
JAM 5:12 Before all things, my brethren, do not ye swear, neither by heaven, neither by earth, neither by whatever other oath. But be your word Yea, yea, Nay, nay, that ye fall not under doom.
JAM 5:13 And if any of you is sorrowful, [[or heavy]], pray he with patient soul, and say he a psalm.
JAM 5:14 If any of you is sick, lead he in priests of the church, and pray they for him, and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord;
JAM 5:15 and the prayer of faith shall save the sick man[[or shall save the sick]], and the Lord shall make him light; and if he be in sins, they shall be forgiven to him.
JAM 5:16 Therefore acknowledge ye each to other your sins, and pray ye each for other, that ye be saved. For the continual prayer of a just man is much worth.
JAM 5:17 Elijah was a deadly man like us, and in prayer he prayed, that it should not rain on the earth, and it rained not three years and six months.
JAM 5:18 And again he prayed, and heaven gave rain, and the earth gave his fruit.
JAM 5:19 And, brethren, if any of you erreth from truth, and any converteth him,
JAM 5:20 he oweth to know, that he that maketh a sinner to be turned from the error of his way, shall save the soul of him from death, and covereth the multitude of sins. [[Amen.]]
1PE 1:1 Peter, apostle of Jesus Christ, to the chosen men, to the comelings of scattering abroad, [[or the chosen guests, or comelings, of dispersion, or the scattering abroad]], of Pontus, of Galatia, of Cappadocia, of Asia, and of Bithynia,
1PE 1:2 by the before-knowing [[or the prescience]] of God, the Father, in hallowing of Spirit, by obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, grace and peace be multiplied to you.
1PE 1:3 Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which by his great mercy begat us again into living hope, by the again-rising of Jesus Christ from death,
1PE 1:4 into heritage uncorruptible, and undefouled, and that shall not fade, that is kept in heavens for you,
1PE 1:5 that in the virtue of God be kept by the faith into health, and is ready to be showed in the last time.
1PE 1:6 In which ye shall make joy, though it behooveth now a little to be sorry in diverse temptations;
1PE 1:7 that the proving of your faith be much more precious than gold, that is proved by fire; and be found into praising, and glory, and honour, in the revelation of Jesus Christ.
1PE 1:8 Whom when ye have not seen, ye love; into whom also now ye not seeing, believe; but ye that believe shall have joy, and gladness that may not be told out, and ye shall be glorified,
1PE 1:9 and have [[or bring again]] the end of your faith, the health of your souls.
1PE 1:10 Of which health prophets sought [[out]], and searched into, that prophesied of the grace to coming in you [[or the grace to come into you]],
1PE 1:11 and sought which either what manner time the Spirit of Christ signified in them, and before-told those passions that be in Christ, and the latter glories.
1PE 1:12 To which it was showed, for not to themselves, but to you they ministered those things, that now be told to you by them that preached to you by the Holy Ghost, sent from heaven, into whom angels desire to behold.
1PE 1:13 For which thing be ye gird the loins of your soul, sober, perfect, and hope ye into that grace that is proffered to you by the showing of Jesus Christ,
1PE 1:14 as sons of obedience, not made like to the former desires of your unknowingness [[or your ignorance]],
1PE 1:15 but like him that hath called you holy; that also yourselves be holy in all living;
1PE 1:16 for it is written, Ye shall be holy, for I am holy.
1PE 1:17 And if ye inwardly call him Father, which deemeth without acception of persons by the work of each man, live ye in dread in the time of your pilgrimage [[in earth]];
1PE 1:18 witting that not by corruptible gold, either silver, ye be bought again of your vain living of fathers’ tradition,
1PE 1:19 but by the precious blood as of the lamb undefouled and unspotted, Christ Jesus,
1PE 1:20 that was known before the making of the world, but he is showed in the last times, for you
1PE 1:21 that by him be faithful in God; that raised him from death, and gave to him everlasting glory, that your faith and hope were in God.
1PE 1:22 And make ye chaste your souls in obedience of charity, in love of brotherhood; of simple heart love ye together more busily.
1PE 1:23 And be ye born again, not of corruptible seed, but [[of]] uncorrupt-ible, by the word of living God, and dwelling into without end.
1PE 1:24 For each flesh is hay, and all the glory of it is as the flower of hay; the hay dried up, and his flower felled down;
1PE 1:25 but the word of the Lord dwelleth [[into]] without end. And this is the word, that is preached to you.
1PE 2:1 Therefore put ye away all malice, and all guile, and feignings [[or simulations]], and envies, and all backbitings [[or detractions]];
1PE 2:2 as now born young children, reasonable, without guile, covet ye milk [[of full teaching]], that in it ye wax into health;
1PE 2:3 if nevertheless ye have tasted, that the Lord is sweet.
1PE 2:4 And nigh ye to him, that is a living stone, and reproved of men, but chosen of God, and honoured;
1PE 2:5 and ye yourselves as quick stones, be ye above builded into spiritual houses, and an holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
1PE 2:6 For which thing the scripture saith, Lo! I shall set [[or put]] in Zion the highest cornerstone, chosen and precious; and he that shall believe in him, shall not be confounded.
1PE 2:7 Therefore honour to you that believe; but to men that believe not, the stone whom the builders reproved, this is made into the head of the corner;
1PE 2:8 and the stone of hurting, and the stone of stumbling, to them that offend to the word, neither believe it, in which they be set.
1PE 2:9 But ye be a chosen kin [[or ye be a kind chosen]], a kingly priesthood, holy folk, a people of purchasing, that ye tell the virtues of him, that called you from darknesses into his wonderful light.
1PE 2:10 Which sometime were not a people of God, but now ye be the people of God; which had not mercy, but now ye have mercy.
1PE 2:11 Most dear, I beseech you, as comelings [[or as guests]], and pilgrims, to abstain you from fleshly desires, that fight against the soul;
1PE 2:12 and have ye your conversation [[or your life]] good among heathen men, that in that thing that they backbite of you, as of mis-doers, they behold you of good works, and glorify God in the day of visitation.
1PE 2:13 Be ye subject to each creature of man, for God; either to the king, as to him that is higher [[or is more worthy]] in state,
1PE 2:14 either to dukes, as to those that be sent of him to the vengeance of mis-doers, and to the praising of good men [[or of good deeds]].
1PE 2:15 For so is the will of God, that ye do well, and make the unknowing-ness of unprudent [[or unwise]] men to be dumb.
1PE 2:16 As free men, and not as having freedom the covering of malice, but as the servants of God.
1PE 2:17 Honour ye all men, love ye brotherhood, dread ye God, honour ye the king.
1PE 2:18 Servants, be ye subject in all dread to lords, not only to good and to mild, but also to tyrants.
1PE 2:19 For this is grace, if for conscience of God any man suffereth heavinesses [[or sorrows]], and suffereth unjustly.
1PE 2:20 For what grace is it, if ye sin, and be buffeted, and suffer? But if ye do well, and suffer patiently, this is grace with God.
1PE 2:21 For to this thing ye be called. For also Christ suffered for us, and left ensample to you, that ye follow the steps of him.
1PE 2:22 Which did not sin, neither guile was found in his mouth.
1PE 2:23 And when he was cursed, he cursed not; when he suffered, he menaced not; but he betook himself to him, that deemed him unjustly.
1PE 2:24 And he himself bare [[or suffered]] our sins in his body on a tree, that we be dead to sins, and live to rightwiseness, by whose wan wound ye be healed.
1PE 2:25 For ye were as sheep erring, but ye be now turned to the shepherd [[or but ye be converted now to the shepherd]], and bishop of your souls.
1PE 3:1 Also women be they subject to their husbands; that if any man, that is, husbands, believe not to the word, by the conversation of women they be won without word.
1PE 3:2 And behold ye in dread your holy conversation.
1PE 3:3 Of whom be there not without-forth curious adorning of hair, either doing about of gold, either adorning of clothing;
1PE 3:4 but that that is the hid man of heart, in uncorruption, and of mild spirit, [[or in uncorruptibility of quiet and mild spirit]], which is rich in the sight of God.
1PE 3:5 For so sometime holy women hoping in God adorned themselves, and were subject to their own husbands.
1PE 3:6 As Sarah obeyed to Abraham, and called him lord; of whom ye be daughters well-doing, and not dreading any perturbation.
1PE 3:7 Also men dwell together, and by knowing [[or science]], give ye honour to the woman’s frailty, [[or to her vessel]], as to the more feeble, and as to even-heirs of grace and of life, that your prayers be not hindered.
1PE 3:8 And in faith all of one will, in prayer be ye each suffering with other, lovers of brotherhood, merciful, mild, meek; [[Forsooth in faith all of one understanding, or will, in prayer be ye compassionate, or each suffering with other, lovers of fraternity, merciful, mild, meek;]]
1PE 3:9 not yielding evil for evil, neither cursing for cursing, but on the contrary blessing; for in this thing ye be called, that ye wield blessing by heritage.
1PE 3:10 For he that will love life, and see good days, constrain his tongue from evil, and his lips, that they speak not guile [[or that they speak no guile]].
1PE 3:11 And bow he from evil, and do good; seek he peace, and perfectly follow it.
1PE 3:12 For the eyes of the Lord be on just men, and his ears on the prayers of them; but the cheer [[or the face]] of the Lord is on men that do evils.
1PE 3:13 And who is it that shall annoy you, if ye be pursuers and lovers of goodness?
1PE 3:14 But also if ye suffer anything for rightwiseness, ye be blessed; but dread ye not the dread of them, that ye be not disturbed [[or distroubled]].
1PE 3:15 But hallow ye the Lord Christ in your hearts, and evermore be ye ready to [[do]] satisfaction to each man asking you reason of that faith and hope that is in you, but with mildness, and dread,
1PE 3:16 having good conscience; that in that thing that they backbite of you, they be confounded, which challenge falsely your good conversation in Christ.
1PE 3:17 For it is better that ye do well, and suffer, if the will of God will, than doing evil. [[Soothly it is better, if the will of God will, ye well-doing, to suffer, than evil-doing.]]
1PE 3:18 For also Christ once died for our sins, he just for unjust, that he should offer to God us [[or should offer us to God]], made dead in flesh, but made quick in Spirit.
1PE 3:19 For which thing he came in Spirit, and also to them that were enclosed together in prison;
1PE 3:20 which were sometime unbelieve-ful, when they abided the patience of God in the days of Noah, when the ship [[or the ark]] was made, in which a few, that is to say, eight souls were made safe by water.
1PE 3:21 And so baptism of like form maketh us safe; not the putting away of the filths of flesh, but the asking of a good conscience in God, by the again-rising of our Lord Jesus Christ,
1PE 3:22 that is in the right half of God, and swalloweth death, that we should be made heirs of everlasting life. He went into heaven, and angels, and powers, and virtues be made subject to him.
1PE 4:1 Therefore for Christ suffered in flesh, be ye also armed by the same thinking; for he that suffered in flesh ceased from sins,
1PE 4:2 that that is left now of time in flesh live not now to the desires of men, but to the will of God.
1PE 4:3 For the time that is passed is enough to the will of heathen men to be ended, which walked in lecheries, and lusts, in much drinking of wine, in unmeasurable [[or oft]] eatings, and drinkings, and unleaveful worshipping of maumets [[or of idols]].
1PE 4:4 In which now they be astonied, in which thing they wonder, for ye run not together into the same confusion of lechery, and blaspheme.
1PE 4:5 And they shall give reason to him, that is ready to deem the quick and the dead.
1PE 4:6 For why for this thing it is preached [[or it is evangelized]] also to dead men, that they be deemed by men in flesh, and that they live by God in Spirit.
1PE 4:7 For the end of all things shall nigh. Therefore be ye prudent, and wake ye in prayers;
1PE 4:8 before all things have ye charity each to other in yourselves always lasting; for charity covereth the multitude of sins.
1PE 4:9 Hold ye hospitality together with-out grutching;
1PE 4:10 each man as he hath received grace, ministering it into each other [[or ministering each to other]], as good dispensers of the manyfold grace of God.
1PE 4:11 If any man speaketh, speak he as the words of God; if any man ministereth, as of the virtue which God ministereth; that God be honoured in all things by Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom is glory and lordship into worlds of worlds. Amen.
1PE 4:12 Most dear brethren, do not ye go in pilgrimage in fervour, that is made to you to temptation, as if any new thing befall to you;
1PE 4:13 but commune ye with the passions of Christ, and have ye joy, that also ye be glad, and have joy in the revelation of his glory.
1PE 4:14 If ye be despised for the name of Christ, ye shall be blessed; for that that is of the honour, and of the glory, and of the virtue of God, and the Spirit that is his, shall rest on you.
1PE 4:15 But no man of you suffer as a manslayer, either a thief, either curser, either a desirer of other men’s goods [[or things]];
1PE 4:16 but if he suffer as a christian man, shame he not, but glorify he God in this name.
1PE 4:17 For time is, that doom begin at God’s house; and if it begin first at us, what end shall be of them, that believe not to the gospel?
1PE 4:18 And if a just man scarcely shall be saved, where shall the unfaithful man and the sinner appear?
1PE 4:19 Therefore and they that suffer by the will of God, betake their souls in good deeds to the faithful Maker of nought.
1PE 5:1 Therefore I, an even-elder man, and a witness of Christ’s passions, which also am a communer of that glory, that shall be showed in time to come; beseech the elder men, that be among you,
1PE 5:2 feed ye the flock of God, that is among you, and purvey ye, not as constrained, but willfully, by God; not for love of foul winning, but willfully,
1PE 5:3 neither as having lordship in the clergy, but that ye be made ensample to the flock, of will [[or by intent]].
1PE 5:4 And when the prince of shepherds shall appear, ye shall receive the crown of glory, that may never fade.
1PE 5:5 Also, ye young men, be ye subject to elder men, and all show ye together meekness; for the Lord withstandeth proud men, but he giveth grace to meek men.
1PE 5:6 Therefore be ye meeked under the mighty hand of God, that he raise you in the time [[or in the day]] of visitation,
1PE 5:7 and cast ye all your busyness into him, for to him is care of you.
1PE 5:8 Be ye sober, and wake ye, for your adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion goeth about, seeking whom he shall devour.
1PE 5:9 Whom against-stand ye, strong in the faith, witting that the same passion is made to that brotherhood of you, that is in the world.
1PE 5:10 And God of all grace, that called you into his everlasting glory, you suffering a little [[in Christ Jesus]], he shall perform, and shall confirm, and shall make firm.
1PE 5:11 To him be glory and lordship, into worlds of worlds. Amen.
1PE 5:12 By Silvanus, [[a]] faithful brother to you as I deem, I wrote shortly; beseeching, and witnessing that this is the very grace of God, in which ye stand.
1PE 5:13 The church that is gathered in Babylon, and Marcus, my son, greeteth you well.
1PE 5:14 Greet ye well together in holy kiss. Grace be to you all that be in Christ. Amen.
1JO 1:1 That thing that was from the beginning, which we heard, which we saw with our eyes, which we beheld, and our hands touched, of the word of life;
1JO 1:2 and the life is showed. And we saw, and witness, and tell to you the everlasting life, that was with the Father, and appeared to us.
1JO 1:3 Therefore that thing, that we saw, and heard, we tell to you, that also ye have fellowship with us, and our fellowship be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
1JO 1:4 And we write this thing to you, that ye have joy, and that your joy be full.
1JO 1:5 And this is the telling, that we heard of him, and tell to you, that God is light, and there be no darknesses in him.
1JO 1:6 If we say, that we have fellowship with him, and we wander in darknesses, we lie, and do not truth.
1JO 1:7 But if we walk in light, as also he is in light, we have fellowship together; and the blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all sin.
1JO 1:8 If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and truth is not in us.
1JO 1:9 If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, that he forgive to us our sins, and cleanse us from all wickedness.
1JO 1:10 And if we say, that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.
1JO 2:1 My little sons, I write to you these things, that ye sin not. But if any man sinneth, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ [[just]],
1JO 2:2 and he is the forgiveness [[or helping]] for our sins; and not only for our sins, but also for the sins of all the world.
1JO 2:3 And in this thing we know, that we know him, if we keep his commandments.
1JO 2:4 He that saith that he knoweth God, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and truth is not in him.
1JO 2:5 But the charity of God is perfect verily in him, that keepeth his word, [[or Forsooth who keepeth his word, verily in him is perfect charity]]. In this thing we know, that we be in him, if we be perfect in him.
1JO 2:6 He that saith, that he dwelleth in him, he oweth to walk, as he walked.
1JO 2:7 Most dear brethren, I write to you, not a new commandment, but the old commandment, that ye had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word, that ye heard.
1JO 2:8 Again I write to you a new commandment, that is true both in him and in you; for darknesses be passed, and very light shineth now.
1JO 2:9 He that saith, that he is in light, and hateth his brother, is in darknesses yet.
1JO 2:10 He that loveth his brother, dwelleth in light, and cause of stumbling is not in him.
1JO 2:11 But he that hateth his brother, is in darknesses, and wandereth in darknesses, and knoweth not whither he goeth; for darknesses have blinded his eyes.
1JO 2:12 Little sons, I write to you, that your sins be forgiven to you for his name.
1JO 2:13 Fathers, I write to you, for ye have known him, that is from the beginning. Young men, I write to you, for ye have overcome the wicked. I write to you, young children [[or infants]], for ye have known the Father.
1JO 2:14 I write to you, brethren, for ye have known him, that is from the beginning. I write to you, young men, for ye be strong, and the word of God dwelleth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked.
1JO 2:15 Do not ye love the world, nor those things that be in the world. If any man loveth the world, the charity of the Father is not in him.
1JO 2:16 For all thing that is in the world, is covetousness of flesh, and covetousness of eyes, and pride of life, which is not of the Father, but it is of the world.
1JO 2:17 And the world shall pass, and the covetousness of it; but he that doeth the will of God, dwelleth [[into]] without end.
1JO 2:18 My little sons, the last hour is; and as ye have heard, that antichrist cometh, now many antichrists be made; wherefore we know, that it is the last hour.
1JO 2:19 They went forth from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they had dwelt with us; but that they be known, that they be not all of us.
1JO 2:20 But ye have anointing [[or unction]] of the Holy Ghost, and know all things.
1JO 2:21 I wrote not to you, as to men that know not the truth, but as to men that know it, and for each leasing is not of truth.
1JO 2:22 Who is a liar, but this that denieth that Jesus is not Christ? This is antichrist, that denieth the Father, and the Son.
1JO 2:23 For each that denieth the Son, hath not the Father; but he that acknowledgeth the Son, hath also the Father.
1JO 2:24 That thing that ye heard at [[or from]] the beginning, dwell it in you; for if that thing dwelleth in you, which ye heard at the beginning, ye shall dwell in the Son and in the Father.
1JO 2:25 And this is the promise, that he promised to us, everlasting life.
1JO 2:26 I wrote these things to you, of them that deceive you,
1JO 2:27 and that the anointing which ye received of him, dwell in you. And ye have not need, that any man teach you, but as his anointing teacheth you of all things, and it is true, and it is not leasing; and as he taught you, dwell ye in him.
1JO 2:28 And now, ye little sons, dwell ye in him, that when he shall appear, we have trust, and be not confounded of him in his coming.
1JO 2:29 If ye know that he is just, know ye that also each that doeth rightwiseness, is born of him.
1JO 3:1 See ye what manner charity the Father gave to us, that we be named the sons of God, and be his sons. For this thing the world knew not us, for it knew not him.
1JO 3:2 Most dear brethren, now we be the sons of God, and yet it appeared not, what we shall be. We know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
1JO 3:3 And each man that hath this hope in him, maketh himself holy, as he is holy.
1JO 3:4 Each man that doeth sin, doeth also wickedness, and sin is wickedness.
1JO 3:5 And ye know, that he appeared to do away sins, and sin is not in him.
1JO 3:6 Each man that dwelleth in him, sinneth not; and each that sinneth, seeth not him, neither knew him.
1JO 3:7 Little sons, no man deceive you; he that doeth rightwiseness, is just, as also he is just.
1JO 3:8 He that doeth sin, is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. In this thing the Son of God appeared, that he undo the works of the devil.
1JO 3:9 Each man that is born of God, doeth not sin; for the seed of God dwelleth in him, and he may not do sin, for he is born of God.
1JO 3:10 In this thing the sons of God be known, and the sons of the fiend. Each man that is not just, is not of God, and he that loveth not his brother [[is not of God]].
1JO 3:11 For this is the telling, that ye heard at the beginning, that ye love each other;
1JO 3:12 not as Cain, that was of the devil, and slew his brother. And for what thing slew he him? for his works were evil, and his brother’s just.
1JO 3:13 Brethren, do not ye wonder, if the world hateth you.
1JO 3:14 We know, that we be translated from death to life, for we love brethren. He that loveth not, dwelleth in death.
1JO 3:15 Each man that hateth his brother, is a manslayer; and ye know, that each manslayer hath not everlasting life dwelling in him.
1JO 3:16 In this thing we have known the charity of God, for he put his life for us, and we owe to put our lives for our brethren.
1JO 3:17 He that hath the chattel [[or the substance]] of this world, and seeth that his brother hath need, and closeth his entrails from him, how dwelleth the charity of God in him?
1JO 3:18 My little sons, love we not in word, neither in tongue, but in work and truth.
1JO 3:19 In this thing we know, that we be of truth, and in his sight we admonish our hearts.
1JO 3:20 For if our heart reproveth us, God is more than our heart, and knoweth all things.
1JO 3:21 Most dear brethren, if our heart reproveth not us, we have trust to God;
1JO 3:22 and whatever we shall ask, we shall receive of him, for we keep his commandments, and we do those things that be pleasant before him.
1JO 3:23 And this is the commandment of God, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and that we love each other, as he gave behest to us.
1JO 3:24 And he that keepeth his commandments, dwelleth in him, and he in him. And in this thing we know, that he dwelleth in us, by the Spirit, whom he gave to us.
1JO 4:1 Most dear brethren, do not ye believe to each spirit, but prove ye the spirits, if they be of God; for many false prophets went out into the world.
1JO 4:2 In this thing the Spirit of God is known; each spirit that acknowl-edgeth that Jesus Christ hath come in flesh, is of God;
1JO 4:3 and each spirit that undoeth Jesus, is not of God. And this is antichrist, of whom ye have heard, that he cometh; and right now he is in the world.
1JO 4:4 Ye, little sons, be of God, and ye have overcome him; for he that is in you is more, than he that is in the world.
1JO 4:5 They be of the world, therefore they speak of the world, and the world heareth them.
1JO 4:6 We be of God; he that knoweth God, heareth us; he that is not of God, heareth not us. In this thing we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.
1JO 4:7 Most dear brethren, love we together, for charity is of God; and each that loveth his brother, is born of God, and knoweth God.
1JO 4:8 He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is charity.
1JO 4:9 In this thing, the charity of God appeared in us, for God sent his one begotten Son into the world, that we live by him.
1JO 4:10 In this thing is charity, not as we had loved God, but for he first loved us, and sent his Son forgiveness [[or helping]] for our sins.
1JO 4:11 Ye most dear brethren, if God loved us, we owe to love each other.
1JO 4:12 No man saw ever God; if we love together, God dwelleth in us, and the charity of him is perfect in us.
1JO 4:13 In this thing we know, that we dwell in him, and he in us; for of his Spirit he gave to us.
1JO 4:14 And we saw, and witness, that the Father sent his Son Saviour of the world.
1JO 4:15 Whoever acknowledgeth, that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God.
1JO 4:16 And we have known, and believe to the charity, that God hath in us. God is charity, and he that dwelleth in charity, dwelleth in God, and God in him.
1JO 4:17 In this thing is the perfect charity of God with us [[or in us]], that we have trust in the day of doom; for as he is, also we be in this world.
1JO 4:18 Dread is not in charity, but perfect charity putteth out dread; for dread hath pain. But he that dreadeth, is not perfect in charity.
1JO 4:19 Therefore love we God, for he loved us before [[or he former loved us]].
1JO 4:20 If any man saith, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar. For he that loveth not his brother, whom he seeth, how may he love God, whom he seeth not?
1JO 4:21 And we have this commandment of God, that he that loveth God, love also his brother.
1JO 5:1 Each man that believeth that Jesus is Christ, is born of God; and each man that loveth him that engendered [[or that engendereth]], loveth him that is born of him.
1JO 5:2 In this thing we know, that we love the children of God, when we love God, and do his commandments.
1JO 5:3 For this is the charity of God, that we keep his commandments; and his commandments be not heavy [[or grievous]].
1JO 5:4 For all thing that is born of God, overcometh the world; and this is the victory that overcometh the world, our faith.
1JO 5:5 And who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?
1JO 5:6 This is Jesus Christ, that came by water and blood; not in water only, but in water and blood. And the Spirit is he that witnesseth, that Christ is [[the]] truth.
1JO 5:7 For three be, that give witnessing in heaven, the Father, the Son [[or the Word]], and the Holy Ghost; and these three be one.
1JO 5:8 And three be, that give witnessing in earth, the Spirit, water, and blood; and these three be one.
1JO 5:9 If we receive the witnessing of men, the witnessing of God is more; for this is the witnessing of God, that is more, for he witnessed of his Son.
1JO 5:10 He that believeth in the Son of God, hath the witnessing of God in him. He that believeth not to the Son, maketh him a liar; for he believeth not in the witnessing that God witnessed of his Son.
1JO 5:11 And this is the witnessing, for God gave to you [[or to us]] everlasting life, and this life is in his Son.
1JO 5:12 He that hath the Son of God, hath also life; he that hath not the Son of God, hath not life.
1JO 5:13 I write to you these things, that ye know, that ye have everlasting life, which believe in the name of God’s Son.
1JO 5:14 And this is the trust which we have to God [[or that we have in God]], that whatever thing we ask after his will, he shall hear us.
1JO 5:15 And we know, that he heareth us, whatever thing we [[shall]] ask; we know, that we have the askings, that we ask of him.
1JO 5:16 He that knoweth that his brother sinneth a sin not to death, ask he, and life shall be given to him that sinneth not to death. There is a sin to death; not for it I say, that any man pray.
1JO 5:17 Each wickedness is sin, and there is [[a]] sin to death.
1JO 5:18 We know, that each man that is born of God, sinneth not; but the generation of God keepeth him, and the wicked toucheth him not.
1JO 5:19 We know, that we be of God, and all the world is set in evil.
1JO 5:20 And we know, that the Son of God came in flesh, and gave to us wit, that we know him very God, and be in the very Son [[Jesus]] of him. This is very God, and everlasting life.
1JO 5:21 My little sons, keep ye you from maumets [[or from simulacra]]. My little sons, keep away from idols. [[Amen.]]
2JO 1:1 The elder man, to the chosen lady, and to her children, which I love in truth; and not I alone, but also all men that know truth;
2JO 1:2 for the truth that dwelleth in you, and with you shall be without end.
2JO 1:3 Grace be with you, mercy, and peace of God the Father, and of Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and charity.
2JO 1:4 I joyed full much, for I found of thy sons going in truth, as we received commandment of the Father.
2JO 1:5 And now I pray thee, lady, not as writing a new commandment to thee, but that that we had from the beginning, that we love each other.
2JO 1:6 And this is charity, that we walk after his commandments. For this is the commandment, that as ye heard at the beginning, walk ye in him.
2JO 1:7 For many deceivers went out into the world, which acknowledge not that Jesus Christ hath come in flesh; this is a deceiver and antichrist.
2JO 1:8 See ye yourselves, lest ye lose the things that ye have wrought, that ye receive full meed;
2JO 1:9 witting that each man that goeth before [[or that goeth away]], and dwelleth not in the teaching of Christ, hath not God. He that dwelleth in the teaching [[of Christ]], hath both the Son and the Father.
2JO 1:10 If any man cometh to you, and bringeth not this teaching, do not ye receive him into your house, neither say to him, Hail.
2JO 1:11 For he that saith to him, Hail, communeth with his evil works. Lo! I before-said to you, that ye be not confounded in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
2JO 1:12 I have more things to write to you, and I would not by parchment and ink; for I hope that I shall come to you, and speak mouth to mouth, that our joy be full.
2JO 1:13 The sons of thy chosen sister greet thee well. The grace of God be with thee. Amen.
3JO 1:1 The elder man to Gaius, most dear brother, whom I love in truth.
3JO 1:2 Most dear brother, of all things I make prayer, that thou enter, and fare wealfully, as thy soul doeth wealfully.
3JO 1:3 I joyed greatly, for brethren came, and bare witnessing to thy truth, as thou walkest in truth.
3JO 1:4 I have not more grace of these things, than that I hear that my sons walk in truth.
3JO 1:5 Most dear brother, thou doest faithfully, whatever thou workest in brethren, and that into pilgrims,
3JO 1:6 which yielded witnessing to thy charity, in the sight of the church; which thou leadest forth, and doest well-worthily to God.
3JO 1:7 For they went forth for his name, and took nothing of heathen men.
3JO 1:8 Therefore we owe to receive such, that we be even-workers of truth.
3JO 1:9 I had written peradventure to the church, but this Diotrephes, that loveth to bear primacy, [[or chief places]], in them, receiveth not us.
3JO 1:10 For this thing, if I shall come, I shall admonish his works, which he doeth, chiding [[or chattering]] against us with evil words. And as if these things suffice not to him, neither he receiveth brethren, and forbiddeth them that receive, and putteth out of the church.
3JO 1:11 Most dear brother, do not thou pursue evil thing, but that that is good thing. He that doeth well, is of God; he that doeth evil, seeth not God.
3JO 1:12 Witnessing is yielded to Deme-trius of all men, and of truth itself; but also we bear witnessing, and thou knowest, that our witnessing is true.
3JO 1:13 I had many things to write to thee, but I would not write to thee by ink and pen.
3JO 1:14 For I hope soon to see thee, and we shall speak mouth to mouth. Peace be to thee. Friends greet thee well. Greet thou well friends by name. Amen.
